Ambiorix was , together with Catuvolcus , prince of the Eburones , leader of a Belgic tribe of north-eastern Gaul ( Gallia Belgica ) , where modern Belgium is located . 
In the 19th century Ambiorix became a Belgian national hero because of his resistance against Julius Caesar , as written in Caesar 's Commentarii de Bello Gallico .
In 57 BC Julius Caesar conquered Gaul and also Belgica ( modernday Northern France , Belgium and a southern section of the Netherlands to the Rhine River ; and the north-western portion of North Rhine-Westfalia , Germany ) . 
There were several tribes in the country who fought against each other regularly . 
The Eburones were ruled by Ambiorix and Catuvolcus . 
In 54 BC Caesar 's troops urgently needed more food and thereby the local tribes were forced to give up part of their harvest , which had not been good that year . 
Understandably the starving Eburones were reluctant to do so and Caesar ordered that camps be built near the Eburones' villages . 
Each centurion was ordered to make sure the food supplies were delivered to the Roman soldiers . 
This created resentment among the Eburones .
Because a drought had disrupted his grain supply , Caesar was forced to winter his legions among the rebellious Belgic tribes . 
Roman troops , led by Q. Titurius Sabinus and L. Aurunculeius Cotta were wintering among the Eburones when they are attacked by the Eburones , led by Ambiorix and Cativolcus . 
Ambiorix deceived the Romans , telling them the attack was made without his consent , and further advised them to flee as a large Germanic force was preparing to cross the Rhine . 
Trusting Ambiorix , Sabinus and Cotta 's troops leave the next morning . 
A short distance from their camp , the Roman troops were ambushed by the Eburones and massacred .
Elsewhere , another Roman force under Quintus Tullius Cicero , brother of Marcus , were wintering amongst the Nervii . 
Leading a coalition of rebellious Belgic tribes , Ambiorix surrounded Cicero 's camp . 
After a long while , a Roman messenger was finally able to slip through the Belgic lines and get word of the uprising to Caesar . 
Mobilising his legions , Caesar immediately marched to Cicero 's aid . 
As they approached the besieged Roman camp , the Belgae moved to engage Caesar 's troops . 
Vastly outnumbered , Caeser ordered his troops to appear confused and frightened , and they successfully lured the Belgae to attack them on ground favourable to the Romans . 
Caesar 's forces launched a fierce counterattack , and soon put the Belgae to flight . 
Later , Caesar 's troops entered Cicero 's camp to find most of the men wounded .
Meanwhile , Indutiomarus , a leader of the Treveri , began to harass the camp of Labienus on a daily basis , eventually provoking Labienus to send out his cavalry with specific orders to kill Indutiomarus . 
They do so , and rout the remnants of the late Indutiomarus 's army . 
Caesar personally remained in Gaul for the remainder of winter due to the renewed Gallic threat .
When the Roman Senate heard what happened , Caesar swore to put down all the Belgic tribes . 
It was very important that the other Roman provinces know that the almighty Roman republic couldn't be beaten so easily . 
After all , Ambiorix had killed a whole Roman legion and five cohorts . 
A Belgic attack on Quintus Cicero ( brother of the orator ) , then stationed with a legion in the Nervii 's territory , failed due to the timely appearance of Caesar . 
The Roman campaigns against the Belgae took a few years , but eventually the Belgae were no match against 50 , 000 trained Roman soldiers . 
The tribes were slaughtered or driven out and their fields burned . 
The Eburones were history from that point . 
According to the writer Florus , Ambiorix and his men managed to cross the Rhine and disappear without a trace .
