Anarchists participated alongside the Bolsheviks in both February and October revolutions , many anarchists initially supporting the Bolshevik coup . 
However , the Bolsheviks soon turned against the anarchists and other left-wing opposition , a conflict that culminated in the 1921 Kronstadt rebellion . 
Anarchists in central Russia were either imprisoned , driven underground or joined the victorious Bolsheviks . 
In the Ukraine , anarchists fought in the civil war against Whites and then the Bolsheviks as part of the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine led by Nestor Makhno , who attempted to establish an anarchist society in the region for a number of months . 
The victory of the Bolsheviks in the October Revolution and the resulting Russian Civil War did serious damage to anarchist movements internationally . 
Many workers and activists saw Bolshevik success as setting an example ; Communist parties grew at the expense of anarchism and other socialist movements . 
In France and the US , for example , certain members of the major syndicalist movements of the CGT and IWW left the organizations and joined the Communist International . 
In Spain , the CNT initially refused to join a popular front electoral alliance , and abstention by CNT supporters led to a right wing election victory . 
But in 1936 , the CNT changed its policy and anarchist votes helped bring the popular front back to power . 
Months later , the former ruling class responded with an attempted coup causing the Spanish Civil War ( 1936 – 1939 ) . 
In response to the army rebellion , an anarchist-inspired movement of peasants and workers , supported by armed militias , took control of Barcelona and of large areas of rural Spain where they collectivised the land . 
But even before the fascist victory in 1939 , the anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the Stalinists , who controlled the distribution of military aid to the Republican cause from the Soviet Union . 
According to George Orwell and other foreign observers , Stalinist-led troops suppressed the collectives and persecuted both dissident Marxists and anarchists . 
