British Honduras faced two obstacles to independence : British reluctance until the early 1960s to allow citizens to govern themselves , and Guatemala 's complete intransigence over its long-standing claim to the entire territory ( Guatemala had repeatedly threatened to use force to take over British Honduras ) .
By 1961 , the United Kingdom was willing to let the colony become independent .
From 1964 the UK controlled only defence , foreign affairs , internal security , and the terms and conditions of the public service .
On 1 June 1973 , the colony 's name was changed to Belize in anticipation of independence .
After 1975 the UK allowed the colonial government to internationalise its case for independence , so Belizeans participated in international diplomacy even before the area became a sovereign nation .
The stalemate in the protracted negotiations between the UK and Guatemala over the future status of Belize led Belizeans to seek the international community 's assistance in resolving issues associated with independence .
Even after Belize became independent in 1981 , however , the territorial dispute remained unsettled .
 
The territorial dispute 's origins lay in the 18th-century treaties in which Great Britain acceded to Spain 's assertion of sovereignty while British settlers continued to occupy the sparsely settled and ill-defined area .
The 1786 Convention of London , which affirmed Spanish sovereignty was never renegotiated , but Spain never attempted to reclaim the area after 1798 .
Subsequent treaties between Britain and Spain failed to mention the British settlement .
By the time Spain lost control of Mexico and Central America in 1821 , Britain had extended its control over the area , albeit informally and unsystematically .
By the 1830s , Britain regarded the entire territory between the Hondo River and Sarstoon River as British .
 
The independent republics that emerged from the disintegrating Spanish Empire in the 1820s claimed that they had inherited Spain 's sovereign rights in the area .
The UK , however , never accepted such a doctrine .
Based on this doctrine of inheritance , Mexico and Guatemala asserted claims to Belize .
Mexico once claimed the portion of British Honduras north of the Sibun River but dropped the claim in a treaty with Britain in 1893 .
Since then , Mexico has stated that it would revive the claim only if Guatemala were successful in obtaining all or part of the nation .
Still , Mexico was the first nation to recognise Belize as an independent country .
 
At the centre of Guatemala 's oldest claim was the 1859 treaty between the United Kingdom and Guatemala .
From Britain 's viewpoint , this treaty merely settled the boundaries of an area already under British dominion .
Today 's independent Belize government holds the viewpoint that treaties signed by the UK are not binding on them , that the International Court of Justice 's precedent is that the 1859 treaty is binding on Guatemala unless Guatemala can firmly prove the 1859 treaty was forced upon them by the UK , that international law says any breaches in the 1859 treaty by the UK would not excuse Guatemala 's breaches and the UK never made "material breaches ," that Guatemala never inherited Spain 's claim because Guatemala never occupied that part of Spain 's New World colonies , and the right of a people to self-determination .
 
Guatemala , in opposition to both the UK and Belize positions , has an older view that this agreement was a treaty of cession through which Guatemala would give up its territorial claims only under certain conditions , including the construction of a road from Guatemala to the Caribbean coast .
The UK never built the road , and Guatemala said it would repudiate the treaty in 1884 but never followed up on the threat .
The dispute appeared to have been forgotten until the 1930s , when the government of General Jorge Ubico claimed that the treaty was invalid because the road had not been constructed .
Britain argued that because neither the short-lived Central American Federation ( 1821–39 ) nor Guatemala had ever exercised any authority in the area or even protested the British presence in the 19th century , British Honduras was clearly under British sovereignty .
In its constitution of 1945 , however , Guatemala stated that British Honduras was the twenty-third department of Guatemala ( Guatemala 's newest claim on Belize in 1999 , however , makes no mention of the 1859 treaty , instead relying on Anglo-Spanish treaties of the 18th century ) .
 
In February 1948 , Guatemala threatened to invade and forcibly annexe the territory , and the British responded by deploying two companies from 2nd Battalion Gloucestershire Regiment .
One company deployed to the border and found no signs of any Guatemalan incursion , but the British decided to permanently station a company in Belize City .
Since 1954 a succession of military and right-wing governments in Guatemala frequently whipped up nationalist sentiment , generally to divert attention from domestic problems .
Guatemala also periodically massed troops on the border with the country in a threatening posture .
In 1957 , responding to a Guatemalan threat to invade , a company of the Worcesteshire Regiment was deployed , staying briefly and carrying out jungle training before leaving .
On 21 January 1958 , a force of pro-Guatemalan fighters from the Belize Liberation Army , who had likely been aided and encouraged by Guatemala , crossed the border and raised the British flag .
A British platoon was then deployed and exchanged fire with them , before arresting some 20 fighters .
 
Negotiations between Britain and Guatemala began again in 1961 , but the elected representatives of British Honduras had no voice in these talks .
George Price refused an invitation from Guatemalan President Ydígoras Fuentes to make British Honduras an "associated state" of Guatemala .
Price reiterated his goal of leading the colony to independence .
In 1963 Guatemala broke off talks and ended diplomatic relations with Britain .
In 1965 Britain and Guatemala agreed to have a United States lawyer , appointed by United States President Lyndon Johnson , mediate the dispute .
The lawyer 's draft treaty proposed giving Guatemala so much control over the newly independent country , including internal security , defence , and external affairs , that Belize would have become more dependent on Guatemala than it was already on Britain .
The United States supported the proposals .
All parties in British Honduras , however , denounced the proposals , and Price seized the initiative by demanding independence from Britain with appropriate defence guarantees .
 
