The main dynasty of Wallachia was called Basarab , from which the current name of the region originated .
In the 15th century , the entire region was a part of the principality of Moldavia .
Stephen the Great ruled between 1457 and 1504 , a period of nearly 50 years during which he won 32 battles defending his country against virtually all his neighbours ( mainly the Ottomans and the Tatars , but also the Hungarians and the Poles ) , while losing only two .
During this period , after each victory , he raised a monastery or a church close to the battlefield honoring Christianity .
Many of these battlefields and churches , as well as old fortresses , are situated in Bessarabia ( mainly along the Dniester River ) .
Between 1711 and 1812 , the Russian Empire occupied the region five times during its wars against Ottoman and Austrian Empires .
Between 1812 and 1846 , the Bulgarian and Gagauz population migrated to the Russian Empire via the River Danube , after living many years under oppressive Ottoman rule , and settled in southern Bessarabia .
Turkic - speaking tribes of the Nogai horde also inhabited the Budjak Region of southern Bessarabia from the 16th to 18th centuries , but were totally driven out prior to 1812 .
By the Treaty of Adrianople that concluded the Russo-Turkish War of 1828-1829 the entire Danube delta of was added to the Bessarabian oblast .
At the end of the Crimean War , in 1856 , by the Treaty of Paris , two districts of southern Bessarabia were returned to Moldavia , causing the Russian Empire to lose access to the Danube river .
After the 1905 Russian Revolution , a Romanian nationalist movement started to develop in Bessarabia .
In the chaos brought by the Russian revolution of October 1917 , a National Council ( Sfatul Ţării ) was established in Bessarabia , with 120 members elected from Bessarabia by some political and professional organisations and 10 elected from Transnistria ( the left bank of the Dniester River where Moldovans and Romanians accounted for less than a third and the majority of the population was Ukrainian .
On the 11th May , 1919 , the Bessarabian Soviet Socialist Republic was proclaimed as an autonomous part of Russian SFSR , but was abolished by the military forces of Poland and France in September 1919 ( see Polish-Soviet War ) .
After the victory of Bolshevist Russia in the Russian Civil War , the Ukrainian SSR was created in 1922 , and in 1924 the Moldovan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was established on a strip of Ukrainian land on the left bank of the Dniester River where Moldovans and Romanians accounted for less than a third and the relative majority of population was Ukrainian . 
On August 2 , the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic was established on most of the territory of Bessarabia , merged with the western parts of the former Moldavian ASSR .
Bessarabia was divided between the Moldavian SSR ( 70% of the territory and 80% of the population ) and the Ukrainian SSR .
Bessarabia 's northern and southern districts ( nowadays Budjak and parts of the Chernivtsi oblast ) were allotted to Ukraine , while some territories ( 4,000 km² ) on the left ( eastern ) bank of the Dniester ( present Transnistria ) , previously part of Ukraine , were allotted to Moldavia .
Following the Soviet takeover , many Bessarabians , who were accused of supporting the deposed Romanian administration , were executed or deported to Siberia and Kazakhstan .
Between September and November 1940 , the ethnic Germans of Bessarabia were offered resettlement to Germany , following a German-Soviet agreement .
Fearing Soviet oppression , almost all Germans ( 93,000 ) agreed .
Most of them were resettled to the newly annexed Polish territories .
On June 22 , 1941 the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union commenced with Operation Barbarossa .
Between June 22 and July 26 , 1941 , Romanian troops with the help of Wehrmacht recovered Bessarabia and northern Bukovina .
The Soviets employed scorched-earth tactics during their forced retreat from Bessarabia , destroying the infrastructure and transporting movable goods to Russia by railway .
At the end of July , after a year of Soviet rule , the region was once again under Romanian control .
As the military operation was still in progress , there were cases of Romanian troops " taking revenge " on Jews in Bessarabia , in the form of pogroms on civilians and murder of Jewish POWs , resulting in several thousand dead .
The supposed cause for murdering Jews was that in 1940 some Jews welcomed the Soviet takeover as liberation .
At the same time the notorious SS Einsatzgruppe D , operating in the area of the German 11th Army , committed summary executions of Jews under the pretext that they were spies , saboteurs , Communists , or under no pretext whatsoever .
That portion of the Jewish population of Bessarabia and Bukovina which did not flee before the retreat of the Soviet troops ( 147,000 ) was initially gathered into ghettos or concentration camps , and then deported during 1941 - 1942 in death marches into Romanian-occupied Transnistria , where the " Final Solution " was applied .
After three years of relative peace , the German-Soviet front returned in 1944 to the land border on the Dniester .
On August 20 , 1944 , a ca. 3,400,000-strong Red Army began a major summer offensive codenamed Jassy-Kishinev Operation .
The Soviet armies overran Bessarabia in a two-pronged offensive within five days .
In pocket battles at Chişinău and Sărata the German 6th Army of ca. 650,000 men , newly reformed after the Battle of Stalingrad , was obliterated .
Simultaneously with the success of the Russian attack , Romania broke the military alliance with the Axis and changed sides .
On August 23 , 1944 , Marshal Ion Antonescu was arrested by King Michael , and later handed over to the Soviets .
The Soviet Union regained the region in 1944 , and the Red Army occupied Romania .
By 1947 , the Soviets had imposed a communist government in Bucharest , which was friendly and obedient towards Moscow .
The Soviet occupation of Romania lasted until 1958 . 
The Romanian communist regime did not openly raise the matter of Bessarabia or Northern Bukovina in its diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union .
In December 1971 , following an informative note from Ion Stănescu , the President of the Council of State Security of the Romanian Socialist Republic , to Yuri Andropov , the chief of KGB , three of the leaders of the National Patriotic Front , Alexandru Usatiuc-Bulgar , Gheorghe Ghimpu and Valeriu Graur , as well as a fourth person , Alexandru Soltoianu , the leader of a similar clandestine movement in northern Bukovina ( Bucovina ) , were arrested and later sentenced to long prison terms .
In 1990 , the first free elections were held for Parliament , with the opposition Popular Front all but winning them .
A government led by Mircea Druc , one of the leaders of the Popular Front , was formed .
The Moldavian SSR became SSR Moldova , and later the Republic of Moldova .
The Republic of Moldova became independent in 1991 ; its boundaries ( those established on August 2 , 1940 ) remained unchanged .
