A Dakhma also known as " Cheel Ghar " in Hindi and " Tower of Silence " in English , is a circular , raised structure used by Zoroastrians for exposure of the dead , particularly to scavenging birds .

The type of construction is not specified by the name .
The common dakhma or dokhma ( from Middle Persian dakhmag ) originally denoted any place for the dead .
Similarly , in the medieval texts of Zoroastrian tradition , the word astodan appears , but today that word denotes an ossuary .
In the Iranian provinces of Yazd and Kerman , the technical term is deme or dema .
In India , the term doongerwadi came into use after a tower was constructed on a hill of that name .
The word dagdah appears in the texts of both India and Iran but , in 20th-century India , signified the lowest grade of temple fire .

The term " Tower of Silence " is a neologism attributed to Robert Murphy , who in 1832 was a translator working for the British colonial government in India .

Zoroastrian tradition considers a dead body — in addition to cut hair and nail-parings — to be nasu , unclean , i.e. potential pollutants. 
Specifically , the corpse demon was believed to rush into the body and contaminate everything it came into contact with , hence the Vendidad ( an ecclesiastical code " given against the demons " ) has rules for disposing of the dead as " safely " as possible .

To preclude the pollution of earth or fire ( see Zam and Atar respectively ) , the bodies of the dead are placed atop a tower — a tower of silence — and so exposed to the sun and to scavenging birds .
Thus , " putrefaction with all its concomitant evils ... is most effectually prevented. " 

The towers , which are fairly uniform in their construction , have an almost flat roof , with the perimeter being slightly higher than the centre .
The roof is divided into three concentric rings : The bodies of men are arranged around the outer ring , women in the second circle , and children in the innermost ring .
Once the bones have been bleached by the sun and wind , which can take as long as a year , they are collected in an ossuary pit at the centre of the tower , where—assisted by lime—they gradually disintegrate , and the remaining material — with run-off rainwater — runs through multiple coal and sand filters before being eventually washed out to sea .
The ritual precinct may be entered only by a special class of pallbearers , called nasellars , a contraction of nasa.salar , caretaker ( -salar ) of potential pollutants ( nasa- ) .

The earliest reference to ritual exposure comes from Herodotus , where the historiographer describes the rites to have been secret , and " vaguely " that these first occurred after the body had been dragged around by a dog or bird .
Further , the Magi ( a term that eventually came to signify a Zoroastrian priest but may not have meant that in Herodotus ' time ) practiced this quite openly , before they finally embalmed the corpse with wax and laid it in a trench .

While the discovery of ossuaries in both eastern and western Iran dating to the 5th and 4th centuries BCE indicates that bones were isolated , that this separation occurred through ritual exposure cannot be assumed : burial mounds , where the bodies were wrapped in wax , have also been discovered .
The tombs of the Achaemenid emperors at Naqsh-e Rustam and Pasargadae likewise suggest non-exposure , at least until the bones could be collected .
According to legend ( incorporated by Ferdowsi into his Shahnameh ) , Zoroaster is himself interred in a tomb at Balkh ( in present-day Afghanistan ) .

While general exposure of the dead is attested from earliest accounts , the ritual customs surrounding that practice appear to date to the Sassanid era ( 3rd – 7th century CE ) .
They are known in detail from the supplement to the Sayest ne Sayest , the two Rivayat collections , and the two Saddars .
The use of towers is first attested in the 16th century .

In the Iranian Zoroastrian tradition , the towers were built atop hills or low mountains in desert locations distant from population centres .
In the early twentieth century , the Iranian Zoroastrians gradually discontinued their use and began to favour burial or cremation .

The decision to change the system was accelerated by three considerations : The first problem arose with the establishment of the Dar ul-Funun medical school .
Since Islam considers unnecessary dissection of corpses as a form of mutilation , thus forbidding it , there were no corpses for study available through official channels .
Dakhmas were repeatedly broken into , much to the dismay and humiliation of the Zoroastrian community .
Secondly , while the towers had originally been built away from population centres , the growth of the towns led to the towers now being within city limits .
Finally , many of the Zoroastrians themselves found the system outdated .
Following extended negotiations between the anjuman societies of Yazd , Kerman , and Tehran , the latter gained a majority and substituted the dakhma with a cemetery some 10km from Tehran at Ghassr-e Firouzeh ( Firouzeh 's Palace ) .
The graves were lined with rocks and plastered with cement to prevent direct contact with the earth .
In Yazd and Kerman , in addition to cemeteries , orthodox Zoroastrians continued to maintain a dakhma until the 1970s when the dakhmas were shut down by law .

Following the rapid expansion of the Indian cities , the squat buildings are today in or near population centres , but separated from the metropolitan bustle by forest gardens .
In Parsi Zoroastrian tradition , exposure of the dead is additionally considered to be an individual 's final act of charity , providing the birds with what would otherwise be destroyed .

In the several decades of the late twentieth and early twenty-first century the population of birds of prey on the Indian subcontinent declined , by 99.9% as of 2008 , primarily due to diclofenac poisoning of the birds following the introduction of that drug for livestock in the 1990s , until banned for cattle by the Indian government in 2006 .
The few surviving birds are often unable to fully consume the bodies. 
Parsi communities in India are currently evaluating captive breeding of vultures and the use of " solar concentrators " ( which are essentially large mirrors ) to accelerate decomposition. 
Some have been forced to resort to burial , as the solar collectors work only in clear weather .
Vultures formerly disposed of a body in minutes , and no other method has proved fully effective .

The right to use the Towers of Silence is a much debated issue among the Parsi community .
The facilities are usually managed by the anjumans , the predominantly conservative local Zoroastrian associations ( usually having five priests on a nine-member board ) .
In accordance with Indian statutes , these associations have domestic authority over trust properties and have the right to grant or restrict entry and use , with the result that the anjumans frequently prohibit the use by the offspring of a " mixed marriage " , that is , where one parent is a Parsi and the other is not .
