Derbent is a city in the Republic of Dagestan , Russia , located on the Caspian Sea , north of the Azerbaijani border .
It is the southernmost city in Russia , and it is the second most important city of Dagestan .
Derbent occupies the very narrow , but primary , gateway crossing between the Eurasian steppes to the north and the Middle East to the south , through a very narrow coastal crossing between the Caspian Sea and the Caucasus Mountains .
Often identified with the legendary Gates of Alexander , Derbent claims to be the oldest city in Russia ( 8th century BCE ) .
Since antiquity , the value of the area as the gateway to the Caucasus has been understood , and Derbent has archaeological structures over 5,000 years old .
As a result of this geographical particularity , the city developed between two walls , stretching from the mountains to the sea .
These fortifications were continuously employed for a millennium and a half , longer than any other extant fortress in the world .
Over the years , different nations have given the city different names , but all connected to the word gate ; its name in Persian is Darband , which means " closed gates " .

Derbent has an important strategic location in the Caucasus : the city is situated on a narrow , three-kilometre strip of land between the Caspian Sea and the Caucasus mountains .
Historically , this position allowed the rulers of Derbent to control land traffic between the Eurasian Steppe and the Middle East .
The only other practicable crossing of the Caucasus ridge was over the Darial Gorge .

The first intensive settlement in the Derbent area dates from the 8th century BCE ; the site was intermittently controlled by the Persian monarchs , starting from the 6th century BCE .
Until the 4th century CE , it was part of Caucasian Albania and is traditionally identified with Albana , the capital .
The modern name is a Persian word meaning " gateway " . 
This name came into use at the end of the 5th or the beginning of the 6th century CE , when the city was re-established by Kavadh I of the Sassanid dynasty of Persia .

The 20-metre ( 66 ft ) high walls with thirty north-looking towers are believed to belong to the time of Kavadh 's son , Khosrau I .
The chronicler Movses Kagankatvatsi wrote about " the wondrous walls , for whose construction the Persian kings exhausted our country , recruiting architects and collecting building materials with a view to constructing a great edifice stretching between the Caucasus Mountains and the Great Eastern Sea. " 
Derbent became a strong military outpost and harbour of the Sassanid empire .
During the 5th and 6th centuries , Derbent also became an important centre for spreading the Christian faith in the Caucasus .

Movses Kagankatvatsi left a graphic description of the sack of Derbent by the hordes of Tong Yabghu of the Western Turkic Khaganate in 627 .
His successor , Böri Shad , proved unable to consolidate Tong Yabghu 's conquests , and the city was retaken by the Persians .
In 654 , Derbent was captured by the Arabs , who transformed it into an important administrative centre and introduced Islam to the area .
Because of its strategic position on the northern branch of the Silk Route , the fortress was contested by the Khazars in the course of the Khazar-Arab Wars .
The Sassanids had also brought Armenians from Syunik to help protect the pass from invaders ; as Arab rule weakened in the region at the end of the ninth century , the Armenians living there were able to establish a kingdom of their own , which lasted until the early years of the thirteenth century .

Excavations on the eastern side of the Caspian Sea , opposite Derbent , revealed the Great Wall of Gorgan , the eastern counterpart to the wall and fortifications of Derbent .
Similar Sassanian defensive fortifications there — massive forts , garrison towns , long walls — also run from the sea to the mountains .

The Caliph Harun al-Rashid spent time living in Derbent and brought it into great repute as a seat of the arts and commerce .
According to Arab historians , Derbent , with a population exceeding 50,000 , was the largest city of the 9th century Caucasus .
In the 10th century , with the collapse of the Arab Caliphate , Derbent became the capital of an emirate .
This emirate often fought losing wars with the neighbouring Christian state of Sarir , allowing Sarir to occasionally manipulate Derbent 's politics .
Despite that , the emirate outlived its rival and continued to flourish at the time of the Mongol invasion in 1239 .

In the 14th century , Derbent was occupied by Timur 's armies .
In 1437 , it fell under the control of the Shirvanshahs of Azerbaijan .
During the 16th century , Derbent was the arena for wars between Turkey and Persia ruled by the Iranian Safavid dynasty .
The Ottoman Empire gained control of the city following the Battle of the Torches in 1583 , and Ottoman ownership was secured with the Treaty of Istanbul of 1590 .

By the 1735 Ganja treaty , Derbent fell within the Persian state .
In 1722 , during the Russo-Persian War , Peter the Great of Russia wrested the town from the Persians , but in 1736 , the supremacy of Nadir Shah was again recognised .
In 1747 , Derbent became the capital of the Derbent Khanate of the same name .

During the Persian Expedition of 1796 , Derbent was stormed by Russian forces under Valerian Zubov .
As a consequence of the Treaty of Gulistan of 1813 — between Russian and Persia — Derbent became part of the Russian Empire .

A large portion of the walls and several watchtowers have been preserved in reasonable shape until the present day .
The walls , reaching to the sea , date from the 6th century , Sassanid dynasty period .
The city has a well-preserved citadel , enclosing an area of 4.5 hectares ( 11 acres ) , enclosed by strong walls .
Historical attractions include the baths , the cisterns , the old cemetreies , the caravanserai , the 18th-century Khan 's mausoleum , as well as several mosques .
The oldest mosque is the Juma Mosque , built over a 6th-century Christian basilica ; it has a 15th-century madrassa .
Other shrines include the 17th-century Kyrhlyar mosque , the Bala mosque and the 18th-century Chertebe mosque .

The modern city is built near the western shores of the Caspian Sea , south of the Rubas River , on the slopes of the Tabasaran Mountains ( part of the Bigger Caucasus range ) .
Derbent is well served by public transport , with its own harbour , a railway going south to Baku , and the road from Baku to Rostov-on-Don .

To the north of the town is the monument of the Kirk-lar , or forty heroes , who fell defending Dagestan against the Arabs in 728 .
To the south lies the seaward extremity of the Caucasian wall ( fifty metres long ) , otherwise known as Alexander 's Wall , blocking the narrow pass of the Iron Gate or Caspian Gates ( Portae Athanae or Portae Caspiae ) .
This , when complete , had a height of 9 m ( 29 ft ), was about 3 m ( 10 ft ) thick and , with its iron gates and numerous watchtowers , formed a valuable defence of the Persian frontier .

Within the framework of administrative divisions , Derbent serves as the administrative centre of Derbentsky District , even though it is not a part of it .
As an administrative division , it is incorporated separately as the City of Derbent — an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts .
As a municipal division , the City of Derbent is incorporated as Derbent Urban Okrug .

The city is home to machine building , food , textile , fishing and fishery supplies , construction materials and wood industries .
It is the production centre of Russian brandy .
The education infrastructure is fairly extensive ; there is a university as well as several technical schools .
About two kilometres ( 1.2 miles ) from the city is the holiday complex of Chayka ( Seagull ) .
