Disco is a genre of music that originated from the nightclubs of New York in the 1970s. It was heavily influenced by Funk and Soul music. It was first used as a means of distracting from negative economic issues, which can be seen from how upbeat and lively it is, and how its lyrics are almost always shallow and superficial and often encourage the listener to move their body in some way. 
In terms of tempo and meter, almost all Disco music is written in 4/4 time, with a quick and lively tempo of approximately 120 bpm (which is the general tempo of almost all dance music). It is recognizable by its four-on-the-floor rhythms, which is a drum style where the bass drum is played on all 4 beats of the bar while the hi-hat plays a semiquaver or quaver pattern with open hi-hat on the offbeats. This technique is inherited by many of its derivatives such as Kwaito.
The bass guitar is dominant and syncopated, meaning that it drives the rhythm forward and is often the focus of the song. The guitar is mainly used for rhythm in Disco and has a distinctly Funky sound due to the use of Funk techniques such as the use of the wah-wah pedal. Its instrumentation consists of not only the standard pop-music instruments like the guitar, bass guitar, and keyboard instruments but also orchestral instruments for more luscious melodies. Synthesizers are also extremely common in Disco music. Because of this, songs often incorporate rich orchestral arrangements of strings and brass playing linear phrases, resulting in what is known as “disco sound”. This complements the soaring, reverberating vocals that are present.
There is often an instrumental “break” in the middle of the song as well, where people can dance to the music without the vocals. Harmony in Disco music is simple, but it can vary greatly between different songs. Songs are always written in verse and chorus structure, and they are often quite long (5-6 minutes on average). This is because they are usually performed non-stop in nightclubs.
Significant Disco groups and artists include Bee Gees - a group that was one of the world’s best-selling artists in their time, whose famous recordings include the songs Stayin’ Alive and Night Fever; Gloria Gaynor, who was instrumental in introducing Disco music to the public, whose famous recordings include the songs I Will Survive and Never Can Say Goodbye (which were pivotal in her success as an artist); and Village People, who are famous because of their catchy tunes and extravagant on-stage costumes, whose famous recordings include the songs YMCA (their most famous song by far) and Macho Man.
One song that truly exemplifies the Disco genre is Boogie Wonderland by Earth, Wind & Fire. Firstly, it is distinctly recognizable as a Disco song because of the four-on-the-floor rhythm that is present and because of the upbeat tempo of 132 bpm and the funky guitar, although to a lesser extent. Another key aspect of Disco music that it incorporates is the verse and chorus structure accompanied by a thick and lush orchestral arrangement consisting of strings and horns, with the long instrumental breaks in between. The vocals heavily reverberate and its lyrics are shallow and talk about dancing, and the words are repeated throughout the song. The song is almost 5 minutes long and can be looped to play continuously easily, which is also characteristic of Disco music.