The Enceladus’ Plumes are a phenomenon that happen in the south pole of Enceladus, one of Saturn’s moons. Plumes of water vapour, as well as other substances, erupt from cracks in the icy surface of this moon. These plumes were first observed in 2005, when the Cassini mission passed over Enceladus. The passage suggested that cryovolcanism (type of volcanism where volcanoes erupt, instead of molten rock, volatile gases such as water or methane) might be present on this planet, even though scientists are unsure, with some believing they’re only geysers. In Enceladus, the gas clouds from the cryovolcanoes (or geysers) are made mostly of water vapour, but also from nitrogen, carbon dioxide and methane. The erupted plumes also feed one of Saturn’s rings. This could lead to multiple scientific discoveries.
             One of them would be the unveiling of secrets about Saturn’s rings. Lots of theories have been made on why these rings exist and what they are made of. Because of the discovery that Enceladus feeds Saturn’s E ring, and that these plumes are made from water vapour, icy particles and a few other components, it has been confirmed that Saturn’s E ring is mostly made of water vapour and ice. It’s likely to be the case on most of the others rings as well.
The fact that these plumes feed the E ring could also help scientists discover where the rings come from. The analysis of the plume that feeds the ring and of the ring itself shows there is a lot more water and ice than rocks, which makes the most commonly accepted theory, that the rings were made when one of Saturn’s moon disintegrated, likely to be wrong, as most moons that distant from the sun are made of half rock and half ice which would mean the rings would be made of half rock and half ice, but that’s not what was observed.
             Another scientific discovery that could be made is the discovery of life in other planets. The plumes of ice are likely to be made from water that comes from an ocean that is located under the icy surface of Enceladus. Those oceans could be home to life forms since they are kept warm by tidal heating (orbital and rotational energy are transformed into heat in the interior of the moon). The geysers of this moon could be a “transportation” for alien bacteria, which would make finding these bacteria a lot easier, without needing to drill through kilometres of ice and rocks. Cassini wasn’t ready to try to collect these possible alien life forms, but the analysis of Enceladus’ plumes revealed various molecules that are associated with life: water vapour, carbon dioxide, methane, nitrogen, propane, acetylene, formaldehyde and traces of ammonia.
     In 2015, Cassini performed a close flyby of Enceladus’ south pole, passing through a plume. It detected hydrogen that wasn’t in equilibrium, which could provide an energy / food source for living organisms. There have already been various proposals to create a new mission just to analyse Enceladus’ plumes more profoundly and find out whether or not there is life on another planet than Earth. If there is life on Enceladus, this planet’s plumes will have helped make one of the most important discoveries ever.
