Happiness is a Drug
Mary Jane absolutely adored her job - selling Happiness in a community where there was none to be found. Everyone was poor and hopeless. Everyone except for Mary. Mary had a surplus of Happiness, and she was the only person who knew how to make more. “So what if I’m making a bit of money from this?” she would sometimes ask herself, “It’s all for the greater good.” Of course, such a job did come with its risks, especially where Mary lived. Possession of Happiness, let alone its distribution, was illegal. Nevertheless, she continued to sell Happiness, albeit in secret. After all, her customers depended on her. Sadness was deadly. She would do anything to make sure that they were never sad. One day, Mary was just closing up when a dishevelled man stumbled through the entrance. His eyes were bloodshot and he had a bewildered look on his face. Mary recognized him immediately. He was her happiest customer. “Cain, what are you doing here so late? You know that I have to close up before the police start patrolling!” Cain simply ignored her and stared at her with blank yet oddly hostile eyes. Of course! He just needed some more Happiness. Mary cheerfully waltzed to her storage room to retrieve some Happiness for him. In fact, she was so full of Happiness herself that she decided to give Cain some for free. However, when she got to the room, there was none to be found. Mary silently cursed to herself. How could she have been so careless?  Any other person would have told Cain to go home by then, but not Mary. She was determined to bring more Happiness into his life; especially because he looked so miserable. She had no other option but to go out and get the ingredients needed to make more Happiness. “You stay right here. I’m just going to run out and get stuff to make more Happiness,” she told Cain while hastily checking the area for any wandering police officers.  As she ran away, she heard what could only be a long, painful moan followed by a heavy thud on the ground. Clearly, the sadness had gotten to Cain. Mary only ever used the finest ingredients to make Happiness, meaning that she was limited to only a few sources. One of those sources was Mario Pastora, who supplied Mary with Rainbow Juice. Luckily for her, he would give it to her for free in exchange for Happiness. “Good morning Mario. How are you?” she said when she saw him pacing around aimlessly in his shack. “Oh hi, Mary. I’m great. Actually, scratch that. I feel amazing!” he said, almost shouting in excitement. “You seem awfully happy today” “I am! Happy. Joyful. Ecstatic!” he said while giggling, “But I can feel the effects wearing off. Do you have any more of the good stuff for me? I’ll give you some juice if you give me more.” “Actually, I need to make more. Can you give me some juice for now, please? I’ll give you more Happiness as soon as I can.” “Of course! Speaking of juice, what’s the big deal with fruit? Like they’re so… fruity. It’s all a conspiracy! Also…” While he was jabbering on, sirens rang out nearby. Mary recognized the source immediately. She did not notice Mario’s voice becoming more and more strained and incohesive. “Police,” she whispered, “They’re probably looking for me. I’m so sorry. I must go now.” Suddenly, Mario stopped talking. Pure rage filled his eyes as he stared at Mary. It was like he was a completely different person then.  “I need… Happiness. Give. Me. Happiness,” he growled. He started to shuffle menacingly towards her. “Look, Mario, I don’t want any trouble. I’m going to give you some to-” She was cut off abruptly as Mario lunged at her. He ripped at her hair while screaming like a banshee. Mary had never seen anyone become so vicious this quickly before. Is this really what too much sadness could do to a person? Before she could think any further about it, several gunshots rang out from behind Mario’s back. For a moment, he simply stood there, frozen with the same look of viciousness on his face, before inevitably collapsing. He was dead. Suddenly, three police officers burst into the shack. There were the ones who had shot Mario. Mary ran as fast as she could, but the police were much faster. One pounced on her, pinned her to the ground, and violently stripped her down while barking orders at the other officers. They handcuffed her hands behind her back and pointed their guns at her while slowly circling her like vultures. Mary could only feel a feeling of despair. Her customers could never be happy again. “Mary Jane, you under arrest for the possession and trafficking of Happiness. Society will be a safer place without you.” “Why would you arrest me? I’m just making people happy! Don’t you want us to be happy?” she cried. “Be happy? BE HAPPY? Do you even know what Happiness does? You are part of the reason why this place is such a dump!” thundered the officer who had pinned her down. They continued to ramble on about details of the arrest, but all Mary could do was wonder, what was the point of living without Happiness?
