The Kyrgyz Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was set up in 1920 and was renamed the Kazakh Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic in 1925 when the Kazakhs were differentiated officially from the Kyrgyz . 
The Russian Empire recognised the ethnic difference between the two groups ; it called them both Kyrgyz to avoid confusion between the terms Kazakh and Cossack ( both names originating from Turkic " free man " ) . 
In keeping with practices in other republics at that time , the parliament had named Nazarbayev its chairman , and then , soon afterward , it had converted the chairmanship to the presidency of the republic . 
In contrast to the presidents of the other republics , especially those in the independence-minded Baltic states , Nazarbayev remained strongly committed to the perpetuation of the Soviet Union throughout the spring and summer of 1991 . 
He took this position largely because he considered the republics too interdependent economically to survive separation . 
At the same time , however , Nazarbayev fought hard to secure republic control of Kazakhstan 's enormous mineral wealth and industrial potential . 
This objective became particularly important after 1990 , when it was learned that Gorbachev had negotiated an agreement with Chevron , an American oil company , to develop Kazakhstan 's Tengiz oil fields . 
Gorbachev did not consult Nazarbayev until talks were nearly complete . 
At Nazarbayev 's insistence , Moscow surrendered control of the republic 's mineral resources in June 1991 . 
Gorbachev 's authority crumbled rapidly throughout 1991 . 
Nazarbayev , however , continued to support him , persistently urging other republic leaders to sign the revised Union Treaty , which Gorbachev had put forward in a last attempt to hold the Soviet Union together . 
Kazakhstan has followed the same general political pattern as the other four Central Asian states . 
After declaring independence from the Soviet political structure completely dominated by Moscow and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ( CPSU ) until 1991 , Kazakhstan retained the basic governmental structure and , in fact , most of the same leadership that had occupied the top levels of power in 1990 . 
Nursultan Nazarbayev , first secretary of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan ( CPK ) beginning in 1989 , was elected president of the republic in 1991 and remained in undisputed power five years later . 
Nazarbayev took several effective steps to ensure his position . 
The constitution of 1993 made the prime minister and the Council of Ministers responsible solely to the president , and in 1995 a new constitution reinforced that relationship . 
Furthermore , opposition parties were severely limited by legal restrictions on their activities . 
Within that rigid framework , Nazarbayev gained substantial popularity by limiting the economic shock of separation from the security of the Soviet Union and by maintaining ethnic harmony in the highly diverse country with more than 100 different nationalities . 
There is considerable topographical variation within Kazakhstan . 
The highest point is the top of the mountain Khan Tengri , on the Kyrgyz border in the Tian Shan range , with an elevation of 7,010 metres ; the lowest point is the bottom of the Karagiye depression at -132m , in the Mangystau province east of the Caspian Sea . 
Most of the country lies at between 200 and 300 metres above sea level , but Kazakhstan 's Caspian shore includes some of the lowest elevations on Earth . 
Many of the peaks of the Altay and Tian Shan ranges are snow covered year-round , and their run-off is the source for most of Kazakhstan 's rivers and streams . 
Except for the Tobol , Ishim , and Irtysh rivers ( the Kazakh names for which are , respectively , Tobyl , Esil , and Ertis ) , portions of which flow through Kazakhstan , all of Kazakhstan 's rivers and streams are part of landlocked systems . 
They either flow into isolated bodies of water such as the Caspian Sea or simply disappear into the steppes and deserts of central and southern Kazakhstan . 
Many rivers , streams , and lakes are seasonal , evaporating in summer . 
The three largest bodies of water are Lake Balkhash , a partially fresh , partially saline lake in the east , near Almaty , and the Caspian and Aral seas , both of which lie partially within Kazakhstan . 
After the fall of the Soviet Union , the German population of Kazakhstan proceeded to emigrate en masse during the 1990s , as Germany is willing to repatriate them . 
Also much of the smaller Greek minority took the chance to repatriate to Greece , so did many Russians move to Russia . 
Some groups have fewer good options for emigration but because of the economic situation are also leaving at rates comparable to the rest of the former Eastern bloc . 
