In the 7th century CE , the Khazars founded an independent Khaganate in the Northern Caucasus along the Caspian Sea .
Although the Khazars were initially Tengri shamanists , many converted to the Abrahamic faiths through interaction with the Byzantine Empire and successive Islamic caliphates ; during the 8th or 9th century , the Khaganate adopted Judaism as state religion .
At their height , the Khazars and their tributaries controlled much of what is today southern Russia , western Kazakhstan , eastern Ukraine , Azerbaijan , large portions of the Northern Caucasus ( Circassia , Dagestan , Chechnya ) , parts of Georgia and the Crimea .
Early Khazar history is intimately tied with that of the Göktürk empire , founded when the Ashina clan overthrew the Juan Juan in 552 CE .
With the collapse of the Göktürk empire due to internal conflict in the seventh century , the western half of the Turk empire split into a number of tribal confederations , among whom were the Bulgars , led by the Dulo clan , and the Khazars , led by the Ashina clan , the traditional rulers of the Göktürk empire .
By 670 , the Khazars had broken the Bulgar confederation , causing various tribal groups to migrate and leaving two remnants of Bulgar rule - Volga Bulgaria , and the Bulgarian khanate on the Danube River .
During the 7th and 8th centuries the Khazar fought a series of wars against the Umayyad Caliphate , which was attempting simultaneously to expand its influence into Transoxiana and the Caucasus .
The first war was fought in the early 650 and ended with the defeat of an Arab force led by Abd ar-Rahman ibn Rabiah outside the Khazar town of Balanjar , after a battle in which both sides used siege engines on the others' troops .
They are also known to have been allied with the Byzantine Empire during at least part of the eighth century .
In 704 or 705 Justinian II , exiled in Cherson , escaped into Khazar territory and married Theodora , the sister of the Khagan Busir .
With the aid of his wife , he escaped from Busir , who was intriguing against him with the usurper Tiberius III , murdering two Khazar officials in the process .
He fled to Bulgaria , whose Khan Tervel helped him regain the throne .
The Khazars later provided aid to the rebel general Bardanes , who seized the throne in 711 as Emperor Philippicus .
The Byzantine emperor Leo III married his son Constantine ( later Constantine V Kopronymous ) to the Khazar princess Tzitzak ( daughter of the Khagan Bihar ) as part of the alliance between the two empires .
Tzitzak , who was baptised as Irene , became famous for her wedding gown , which started a fashion craze in Constantinople for a type of robe ( for men ) called tzitzakion .
Their son Leo ( Leo IV ) would be better known as " Leo the Khazar " .
Originally , the Khazars practiced traditional Turkic shamanism , focused on the sky god Tengri , but were heavily influenced by Confucian ideas imported from China , notably that of the Mandate of Heaven .
The Ashina clan were considered to be the chosen of Tengri and the kaghan was the incarnation of the favour the sky-god bestowed on the Turks .
A kaghan who failed had clearly lost the god 's favour and was typically ritually executed .
Historians have sometimes wondered , only half in jest , whether the Khazar tendency to occasionally execute their rulers on religious grounds led those rulers to seek out other religions .
Essays in the Kuzari , written by Yehuda Halevi , detail a moral liturgical reason for the conversion which some consider a moral tale .
Some researchers have suggested part of the reason for conversion was political expediency to maintain a degree of neutrality : the Khazar empire was between growing populations , Muslims to the east and Christians to the west .
Both religions recognised Judaism as a forebear and worthy of some respect .
The exact date of the conversion is hotly contested .
It may have occurred as early as 740 or as late as the mid-800s .
Recently discovered numismatic evidence suggests that Judaism was the established state religion by c. 830 , and though St. Cyril ( who visited Khazaria in 861 ) did not identify the Khazars as Jews , the khagan of that period , Zachariah , had a biblical Hebrew name .
Some medieval sources give the name of the rabbi who oversaw the conversion of the Khazars as Isaac Sangari or Yitzhak ha-Sangari .
The first Jewish Khazar king was named Bulan which means " elk " , though some sources give him the Hebrew name Sabriel .
A later king , Obadiah , strengthened Judaism , inviting rabbis into the kingdom and built synagogues .
Jewish figures such as Saadia Gaon made positive references to the Khazars , and they are excoriated in contemporary Karaite writings as " bastards " ; it is therefore unlikely that they adopted Karaism as some ( such as Avraham Firkovich ) have proposed .
Likewise , the Khazar rulers viewed themselves as the protectors of international Jewry , and corresponded with foreign Jewish leaders ( the letters exchanged between the Khazar ruler Joseph and the Spanish rabbi Hasdai ibn Shaprut have been preserved ) .
They were known to retaliate against Muslim or Christian interests in Khazaria for persecution of Jews abroad .
Ibn Fadlan relates that around 920 the Khazar ruler received information that Muslims had destroyed a synagogue in the land of Babung , in Iran ; he gave orders that the minaret of the mosque in his capital should be broken off , and the muezzin executed .
He further declared that he would have destroyed the mosque entirely had he not been afraid that the Muslims would in turn destroy all the synagogues in their lands .
Similarly , during the persecutions of Byzantine Jews under Romanos I , the Khazar government retaliated by attacking Byzantine interests in the Crimea .
A Greek Orthodox bishop was resident at Atil and was subject to the authority of the Metropolitan of Doros .
The " apostle of the Slavs " , Saint Cyril , is said to have attempted the conversion of Khazars without enduring results .
Khazaran had a sizable Muslim quarter with a number of mosques .
A Muslim officer , the khazz , represented the Muslim community in the royal court .
Both the Khagan and the Khagan Bek lived in Itil .
The Khagan 's palace , according to Arab sources , was on an island in the Volga River .
He was reported to have 25 wives , each the daughter of a client ruler ; this may , however , have been an exaggeration .
In the Khazar Correspondence , King Joseph identifies himself as the ruler of the Khazars and makes no reference to a colleague .
It has been disputed whether Joseph was a Khagan or a Bek ; his description of his military campaigns make the latter probable .
However , а ccording to the Schechter Letter , king Joseph is identified as not Khagan .
A third option is that by the time of the Correspondence ( c. 950 - 960 ) the Khazars had merged the two positions into a single ruler , or that the Beks had somehow supplanted the Khagans or vice versa .
The Khazar dual kingship may have influenced other people ; power was similarly divided among the early Hungarian people between the sacral king , or kende , and the military king , or gyula .
Khazar armies were led by the Khagan Bek and commanded by subordinate officers known as tarkhans .
The Khazar Khaganate was , at its height , an immensely powerful state .
The Khazar heartland was on the lower Volga and the Caspian coast as far south as Derbent .
In addition , from the late 600s the Khazars controlled most of the Crimea and the northeast littoral of the Black Sea .
By 800 Khazar holdings included most of the Pontic steppe as far west as the Dneiper and as far east as the Aral Sea ( some Turkic history atlases show the Khazar sphere of influence extending well east of the Aral ) .
During the Khazar-Arab war of the early 700s , some Khazars evacuated to the Ural foothills , and some settlements may have remained .
The Pechenegs ; the Oghuz ; the Crimean Goths ; the Crimean Huns ; the early Magyars .
Various East Slavic tribes such as the Derevlians and the Vyatichs ; various early Rus' polities .
The ninth century is sometimes known as the Pax Khazarica , a period of Khazar hegemony over the Pontic steppe that allowed trade to flourish and facilitated trans-Eurasian contacts .
However , in the early 10th century the empire began to decline due to the attacks of both Vikings from Kievan Rus and various Turkic tribes .
It enjoyed a brief revival under the strong rulers Aaron II and Joseph , who subdued rebellious client states such as the Alans and led victorious wars against Rus invaders .
From the beginning of the tenth century , the Khazars found themselves fighting on multiple fronts as nomadic incursions were exacerbated by uprisings by former clients and invasions from former allies .
