A main element uniting Germanic societies is kingship , in origin a sacral institution combining the functions of military leader , high priest , lawmaker and judge . 
Germanic monarchy was elective , the king was elected by the free men from among elegible candidates of a family ( OE cynn ) tracing their ancestry to the tribe 's divine or semi-divine founder . 
Free women did not have a political station of their own but inherited the rank of their father if unmarried , or their husband if married . 
The weregild or recompense due for the killing or injuring of a woman is notably set at twice that of a man of the same rank in Alemannic law . 
All freemen had the right to participate in general assemblies or things , where disputes between freemen were addressed according to customary law . 
The king was bound to uphold ancestral law , but was at the same time the source for new laws for cases not addressed in previous tradition . 
This aspect was the reason for the creation of the various Germanic law codes by the kings following their conversion to Christianity : besides recording inherited tribal law , these codes have the purpose of settling the position of the church and Christian clergy within society , usually setting the weregilds of the members of the clerical hierarchy parallel to that of the existing hierarchy of nobility , with the position of an archbishop mirroring that of the king . 
In the case of a suspected crime , the accused could avoid punishment by presenting a fixed number of free men ( their number depending on the severity of the crime ) prepared to swear an oath on his innocence . 
Failing this , he could prove his innocence in a trial by combat . 
Corporal or capital punishment for free men does not figure in the Germanic law codes , and banishment appears to be the most severe penalty issued officially . 
This reflects that Germanic tribal law did not have the scope of exacting revenge , which was left to the judgement of the family of the victim , but to settle damages as fairly as possible once an involved party decided to bring a dispute before the assembly . 
Traditional Germanic society is gradually replaced by the system of estates and feudalism characteristic of the High Middle Ages in both the Holy Roman Empire and Anglo-Norman England in the 11th to 12th centuries , to some extent under the influence of Roman law as an indirect result of Christianisation , but also because political structures had grown too large for the flat hierarchy of a tribal society . 
The same effect of political centralisation takes hold in Scandinavia slightly later , in the 12th to 13th century ( Age of the Sturlungs , Consolidation of Sweden , Civil war era in Norway ) , by the end of the 14th century culminating in the giant Kalmar Union . 
Elements of tribal law , notably the wager of battle , nevertheless remained in effect throughout the Middle Ages , in the case of the Holy Roman Empire until the establishment of the Imperial Chamber Court in the beginning German Renaissance . 
In the federalist organisation of Switzerland , where cantonal structures remained comparatively local , the Germanic thing survived into the 20th century in the form of the Landsgemeinde , albeit subject to federal law . 
