Reggae is a genre of music that originated from Jamaica in the 1960s, particularly from Kingston. It was heavily influenced by Rastafarianism and Ska (an earlier form of Jamaican pop music) and to a lesser extent American jazz, blues music, and Mento (a style of Jamaican folk music). 
Its instrumentation and chord progressions are simple and similar to other popular music, following the common chord progressions such as I – V – vi – IV and using the standard instruments present in most pop songs. However, it is very bass-heavy, and other instruments such as horns and shakers are sometimes added to make the music more exciting. Unique elements of instrumentation include a corrugated stick rubbed by a plain stick, called a “scraper”, and a guitar-playing effect known as “Skengay”, meant to emulate the sounds of gunshots in the ghettos. 
However, what makes it truly unique and recognizable is its distinct rhythm, which consists of emphasized offbeat rhythms, also known as the ‘shank’. This creates a counterpoint between the bass downbeat, and the offbeat guitars and drums section. In terms of meter and tempo, almost all Reggae music is written in 4/4 time, with a tempo slower than most commercial pop songs, ranging from 80 to 110 bpm. This gives the music a more groovy, but almost jumpy feel. Due to its Jamaican and Rastafarian roots, lyrics are most often sung in Jamaican Patois, Jamaican English, or Rastafarian English, with a clear Jamaican accent. The lyrics are usually politicized and somewhat bitter - usually criticising social issues, although some Reggae music talks about lighter and more personal subjects. It is widely regarded as a voice of the oppressed. 
Significant Reggae artists and groups include Toots and the Maytals, who first popularised the term “Reggae” in their song Do the Reggay; Bob Marley, possibly the most famous Reggae artist ever and one of the best-selling artists of all time, whose works include the albums Kaya and Legend (which went on to become the best-selling Reggae album of all time); and Jimmy Cliff, who helped popularize Reggae music because of his starring role in the film The Harder They Come, whose works include Wonderful World, Beautiful People and Reggae Night. All three of these artists popularized around the world. 
One song that truly exemplifies the Reggae style is “Buffalo Soldier” by Bob Marley. Not only is it one of the most famous Reggae songs ever, but it exhibits all of the defining features of Reggae music. It incorporates the distinctive offbeat rhythms, and its tempo and meter are typical of the style, being a slow 4/4. The instruments used are electric guitar, bass guitar, trumpet, saxophone, drums, and other percussion such as piano and electric organ. The lyrics are powerful and sung in a clear Jamaican accent, containing strong messages of racial equality in America and comments on a struggle for survival.
