Like its predecessor, Splatoon 2 is a multiplayer third-person shooter in which players control characters known as Inklings and use colored ink to attack opponents and clear goals. Inklings can morph between humanoid form, during which they can fire ink with their weapons, and squid form, which allows them to swim through ink of their own color in order to move quickly and replenish ink supplies. The sequel adds new standard, sub and special weapons to the game, including dual-wield pistols, that allow the player to perform dodge rolls, and jetpacks. Like the previous game, the game features the standard Turf War mode in Regular Battles, and a rotation of Splat Zones, Tower Control, Rainmaker, and the new Clam Blitz modes for Ranked Battles, which are now ranked individually. League Battles allow players to form teams with friends. A new mode, Salmon Run, allows up to four players to team up cooperatively to tackle waves of enemies called the Salmonids 
Once per month, a Splatfest will occur. During the Splatfest, players get to chose a side in a debate and decide the winner through battling. Splatfest topics are usually announced one week in advance, after which point players can choose their team in Inkopolis Square. Topics are usually region-specific and happen at different times of the month, as not all topics will make sense in all regions. Splatfest battles are Turf War only, and winning battles awards clout to the winning team. At the end of the Splatfest, the winning side is decided by evaluating popularity and clout earned in battle. All players who participate earn rare rewards, but players who chose the winning team receive a slightly higher cut.
The game features a single-player campaign, Hero Mode (Octo Canyon), in which the player must battle through various levels fighting the evil Octarians. Unlike the previous game's single-player campaign which had a pre-determined weapon set, the player can now earn various weapons, some of which are required when playing levels for the first time. In addition to scrolls that unlock artwork and in-game lore, players can collect Sardinium to upgrade their Hero Mode weapons and tickets that can be exchanged for temporary reward boosts in multiplayer battles, such as increased experience or money. In the Octo Expansion DLC, players play as an Octoling in a new single-player campaign featuring 80 missions.
Players can play multiplayer online through an internet connection or play locally, although local play requires multiple consoles and copies of the game. The game also features LAN support with an adapter accessory for local private tournaments. The game supports amiibo figures, which allow players to store their Inkling's custom look and unlock additional content, and free post-release updates and events are ongoing.
Splatoon 2 takes place approximately two years after the final Splatfest event of the first game, in which the pop idol Marie defeated her cousin and fellow Squid Sister, Callie. After having drifted apart in the months following the event, Marie worries that Callie was negatively affected by the result. After leaving Inkopolis to see her parents, Marie returns home to discover that the Great Zapfish that powers the city has gone missing again, as has Callie. Fearing that the evil Octarians are once more involved, Marie takes up her role as Agent 2 of the New Squidbeak Splatoon and recruits an Inkling from Inkopolis Square, the player character, to become Agent 4 and investigate.With assistance from Marie and weapons expert Sheldon, Agent 4 makes their way through Octo Canyon fighting Octarians and recovering several stolen Zapfish, including ones powering the Octarians' war machines, such as the Octo Oven and the Octo Shower. They discover that Callie herself has sided with the Octarians after being brainwashed by their leader, DJ Octavio, who has escaped his imprisonment after his defeat in the first game and once more is using the Great Zapfish to power his new DJ stage, the Octobot King II. Marie arrives with Sheldon and frees Callie from her mind control, and together they help Agent 4 defeat Octavio once more. With the Great Zapfish safely returned to Inkopolis, the Squid Sisters happily reunite and resume their musical career.
