THERE were once five-and-twenty tin soldiers, who were all brothers, for they had been made out of the same old tin spoon.
They shouldered arms and looked straight before them, and wore a splendid uniform, red and blue.
The first thing in the world they ever heard were the words, "Tin soldiers!" uttered by a little boy, who clapped his hands with delight when the lid of the box, in which they lay, was taken off.
They were given him for a birthday present, and he stood at the table to set them up.
The soldiers were all exactly alike, excepting one, who had only one leg; he had been left to the last, and then there was not enough of the melted tin to finish him, so they made him to stand firmly on one leg, and this caused him to be very remarkable.

The table on which the tin soldiers stood, was covered with other playthings, but the most attractive to the eye was a pretty little paper castle.
Through the small windows the rooms could be seen.
In front of the castle a number of little trees surrounded a piece of looking-glass, which was intended to represent a transparent lake.
Swans, made of wax, swam on the lake, and were reflected in it.
All this was very pretty, but the prettiest of all was a tiny little lady, who stood at the open door of the castle; she, also, was made of paper, and she wore a dress of clear muslin, with a narrow blue ribbon over her shoulders just like a scarf.
In front of these was fixed a glittering tinsel rose, as large as her whole face.
The little lady was a dancer, and she stretched out both her arms, and raised one of her legs so high, that the tin soldier could not see it at all, and he thought that she, like himself, had only one leg.
"That is the wife for me," he thought; "but she is too grand, and lives in a castle, while I have only a box to live in, five-and-twenty of us altogether, that is no place for her.
Still I must try and make her acquaintance." Then he laid himself at full length on the table behind a snuff-box that stood upon it, so that he could peep at the little delicate lady, who continued to stand on one leg without losing her balance.
When evening came, the other tin soldiers were all placed in the box, and the people of the house went to bed.
Then the playthings began to have their own games together, to pay visits, to have sham fights, and to give balls.
The tin soldiers rattled in their box; they wanted to get out and join the amusements, but they could not open the lid.
The nut-crackers played at leap-frog, and the pencil jumped about the table.
There was such a noise that the canary woke up and began to talk, and in poetry too.
Only the tin soldier and the dancer remained in their places.
She stood on tiptoe, with her legs stretched out, as firmly as he did on his one leg.
He never took his eyes from her for even a moment.
The clock struck twelve, and, with a bounce, up sprang the lid of the snuff-box; but, instead of snuff, there jumped up a little black goblin; for the snuff-box was a toy puzzle.
