A tokamak is a device using a magnetic field to confine a plasma in the shape of a torus .
Achieving a stable plasma equilibrium requires magnetic field lines that move around the torus in a helical shape .
Such a helical field can be generated by adding a toroidal field ( travelling around the torus in circles ) and a poloidal field ( traveling in circles orthogonal to the toroidal field ) .
In a tokamak , the toroidal field is produced by electromagnets that surround the torus , and the poloidal field is the result of a toroidal electric current that flows inside the plasma .
This current is induced inside the plasma with a second set of electromagnets .

The tokamak is one of several types of magnetic confinement devices , and is one of the most-researched candidates for producing controlled thermonuclear fusion power .
Magnetic fields are used for confinement since no solid material could withstand the extremely high temperature of the plasma .

Tokamaks were invented in the 1950s by Soviet physicists Igor Tamm and Andrei Sakharov , inspired by an original idea of Oleg Lavrentiev .

Although nuclear fusion research began soon after World War II , the programs in various countries were each initially classified as secret .
It was not until after the 1955 United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in Geneva that programs were declassified and international scientific collaboration could take place .

Experimental research of tokamak systems started in 1956 in Kurchatov Institute , Moscow by a group of Soviet scientists led by Lev Artsimovich .
The group constructed the first tokamaks , the most successful being T-3 and its larger version T-4 .
T-69 was tested in 1968 in Novosibirsk , conducting the first ever quasistationary thermonuclear fusion reaction .

In 1968 , at the third IAEA International Conference on Plasma Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research at Novosibirsk , Soviet scientists announced that they had achieved electron temperatures of over 1000 eV in a tokamak device .
British and American scientists met this news with skepticism , since they were far from reaching that benchmark ; they remained suspicious until laser scattering tests confirmed the findings next year .

Positively and negatively charged ions and negatively charged electrons in a fusion plasma are at very high temperatures , and have correspondingly large velocities .
In order to maintain the fusion process , particles from the hot plasma must be confined in the central region , or the plasma will rapidly cool .
Magnetic confinement fusion devices exploit the fact that charged particles in a magnetic field experience a Lorentz force and follow helical paths along the field lines .

Early fusion research devices were variants on the Z-pinch and used electrical current to generate a poloidal magnetic field to contain the plasma along a linear axis between two points .
Researchers discovered that a simple toroidal field , in which the magnetic field lines run in circles around an axis of symmetry , confines a plasma hardly better than no field at all .
This can be understood by looking at the orbits of individual particles .
The particles not only spiral around the field lines , they also drift across the field .
Since a toroidal field is curved and decreases in strength moving away from the axis of rotation , the ions and the electrons move parallel to the axis , but in opposite directions .
The charge separation leads to an electric field and an additional drift , in this case outward ( away from the axis of rotation ) for both ions and electrons .
Alternatively , the plasma can be viewed as a torus of fluid with a magnetic field frozen in .
The plasma pressure results in a force that tends to expand the torus .
The magnetic field outside the plasma cannot prevent this expansion .
The plasma simply slips between the field lines .

For a toroidal plasma to be effectively confined by a magnetic field , there must be a twist to the field lines .
There are then no longer flux tubes that simply encircle the axis , but , if there is sufficient symmetry in the twist , flux surfaces .
Some of the plasma in a flux surface will be on the outside ( larger major radius , or " low-field side " ) of the torus and will drift to other flux surfaces farther from the circular axis of the torus .
Other portions of the plasma in the flux surface will be on the inside ( smaller major radius , or " high-field side " ) .
Since some of the outward drift is compensated by an inward drift on the same flux surface , there is a macroscopic equilibrium with much improved confinement .
Another way to look at the effect of twisting the field lines is that the electric field between the top and the bottom of the torus , which tends to cause the outward drift , is shorted out because there are now field lines connecting the top to the bottom .

When the problem is considered even more closely , the need for a vertical ( parallel to the axis of rotation ) component of the magnetic field arises .
The Lorentz force of the toroidal plasma current in the vertical field provides the inward force that holds the plasma torus in equilibrium .

This device where a large toroidal current is established ( 15 Mega-amps in ITER ) suffers from a fundamental problem of stability .
The nonlinear evolution of magnetohydrodynamical instabilities leads to a dramatic quench of the plasma current on a very short time scale , of the order of the millisecond .
Very energetic electrons are created ( runaway electrons ) and a global loss of confinement is finally obtained .
A very high energy is deposited on small areas .
This phenomenon is called a major disruption .
The occurrence of major disruptions in running tokamaks has always been rather high , of the order of a few percent of the total numbers of the shots .
In currently operated tokamaks , the damage is often large but rarely dramatic .
In the ITER tokamak , it is expected that the occurrence of a limited number of major disruptions will definitively damage the chamber with no possibility to restore the device .

In an operating fusion reactor , part of the energy generated will serve to maintain the plasma temperature as fresh deuterium and tritium are introduced. However , in the startup of a reactor , either initially or after a temporary shutdown , the plasma will have to be heated to its operating temperature of greater than 10 keV ( over 100 million degrees Celsius ). In current tokamak ( and other ) magnetic fusion experiments , insufficient fusion energy is produced to maintain the plasma temperature .

Since the plasma is an electrical conductor , it is possible to heat the plasma by inducing a current through it ; in fact , the induced current that heats the plasma usually provides most of the poloidal field .
The current is induced by slowly increasing the current through an electromagnetic winding linked with the plasma torus : the plasma can be viewed as the secondary winding of a transformer .
This is inherently a pulsed process because there is a limit to the current through the primary ( there are also other limitations on long pulses ) .
Tokamaks must therefore either operate for short periods or rely on other means of heating and current drive .
The heating caused by the induced current is called ohmic ( or resistive ) heating ; it is the same kind of heating that occurs in an electric light bulb or in an electric heater .
The heat generated depends on the resistance of the plasma and the amount of electric current running through it .
But as the temperature of heated plasma rises , the resistance decreases and ohmic heating becomes less effective .
It appears that the maximum plasma temperature attainable by ohmic heating in a tokamak is 20-30 million degrees Celsius .
To obtain still higher temperatures , additional heating methods must be used .

Neutral-beam injection involves the introduction of high-energy ( rapidly moving ) atoms into the ohmically heated , magnetically confined plasma .
The atoms are ionised as they pass through the plasma and are trapped by the magnetic field .
The high-energy ions then transfer part of their energy to the plasma particles in repeated collisions , increasing the plasma temperature .

A gas can be heated by sudden compression .
In the same way , the temperature of a plasma is increased if it is compressed rapidly by increasing the confining magnetic field .
In a tokamak system this compression is achieved simply by moving the plasma into a region of higher magnetic field ( i.e. , radially inward ) .
Since plasma compression brings the ions closer together , the process has the additional benefit of facilitating attainment of the required density for a fusion reactor .

High-frequency electromagnetic waves are generated by oscillators ( often by gyrotrons or klystrons ) outside the torus .
If the waves have the correct frequency ( or wavelength ) and polarisation , their energy can be transferred to the charged particles in the plasma , which in turn collide with other plasma particles , thus increasing the temperature of the bulk plasma .
Various techniques exist including electron cyclotron resonance heating ( ECRH ) and ion cyclotron resonance heating .
This energy is usually transferred by microwaves .

The fusion reactions in the plasma spiraling around a tokamak reactor produce large amounts of high energy neutrons .
These neutrons , being electrically neutral , are no longer held in the stream of plasma by the toroidal magnets and continue until stopped by the inside wall of the tokamak .
This is a large advantage of tokamak reactors since these freed neutrons provide a simple way to extract heat from the plasma stream ; this is how the fusion reactor generates usable energy .
The inside wall of the tokamak must be cooled because these neutrons yield enough energy to melt the walls of the reactor .
A cryogenic system is used to prevent heat loss from the superconducting magnets .
Mostly liquid helium and liquid nitrogen are used as refrigerants .
Ceramic plates specifically designed to withstand high temperatures are also placed on the inside reactor wall to protect the magnets and reactor .
