In the early part of the Civil War , Alabama was not the scene of military operations , yet the state contributed about 120,000 men to the Confederate service , practically all the white population capable of bearing arms .
Most were recruited locally and served with men they knew , which built esprit and strengthened ties to home .
Medical conditions were severe .
About 15% of fatalities were from disease , more than the 10% from battle .
Alabama had few well-equipped hospitals , but it had many women who volunteered to nurse the sick and wounded .
Soldiers were poorly equipped , especially after 1863 .
Often they pillaged the dead for boots , belts , canteens , blankets , hats , shirts and trousers .
Uncounted thousands of slaves worked with Confederate troops ; they took care of horses and equipment , cooked and did laundry , hauled supplies , and helped in field hospitals .
Other slaves built defensive installations , especially those around Mobile .
They graded roads , repaired railroads , drove supply wagons , and labored in iron mines , iron foundries and even in the munitions factories .
The service of slaves was involuntary : their unpaid labour was impressed from their unpaid masters .
About 10,000 slaves escaped and joined the Union army , along with 2,700 white men .
In 1867 , the congressional plan of Reconstruction was completed and Alabama was placed under military government .
The freedmen were enrolled as voters .
Numerous white citizens were temporarily disfranchised , as the government suspected the loyalty of former Confederates .
The new Republican party , made up of freedmen , Union sympathisers ( scalawags ) , and northerners who had settled in the South ( disparagingly called carpetbaggers ) took control two years after the war ended .
They called a constitutional convention in November 1867 , and framed a constitution which conferred universal manhood suffrage .
Whites who had fought for the Confederacy were disfranchised for a temporary period .
The Reconstruction Acts of Congress required every new constitution to be ratified by a majority of the legal voters of the state .
The whites of Alabama largely stayed away from the polls .
After five days of voting , the constitution needed 13,550 to secure a majority .
Congress then enacted that a majority of the votes cast should be sufficient .
Thus the constitution went into effect , the state was readmitted to the Union in June 1868 , and a new governor and legislature were elected .
While African Americans suffered from segregation after disfranchisement , the state was diminished by its deliberate suppression of their talents .
From 1910 - 1940 , tens of thousands of talented African Americans migrated north from Alabama in the Great Migration to seek jobs , education for their children , and freedom from lynching in northern cities , such as Chicago , Detroit , Cleveland , Philadelphia and New York . There they built their own businesses , churches and community organisations , music and arts , and began to create a middle class .
The rate of population growth in Alabama dropped from 20.8% in 1900 and 16.9% in 1910 , to 9.8% in 1920 , reflecting the impact of the outmigration .
Disfranchisement was ended only in the mid-1960s by African Americans' leading the Civil Rights Movement and gaining Federal legislation to protect their voting and civil rights .
