Albedo is the diffuse reflectivity or reflecting power of a surface. 
It is the ratio of reflected radiation from the surface to incident radiation upon it. 
Its dimensionless nature lets it be expressed as a percentage and is measured on a scale from zero for no reflection of a perfectly black surface to 1 for perfect reflection of a white surface.

Albedo depends on the frequency of the radiation. 
When quoted unqualified , it usually refers to some appropriate average across the spectrum of visible light. 
In general , the albedo depends on the directional distribution of incident radiation , except for Lambertian surfaces , which scatter radiation in all directions according to a cosine function and therefore have an albedo that is independent of the incident distribution. 
In practice , a bidirectional reflectance distribution function ( BRDF ) may be required to accurately characterize the scattering properties of a surface , but albedo is very useful as a first approximation.

The albedo is an important concept in climatology , astronomy , and calculating reflectivity of surfaces in LEED sustainable-rating systems for buildings. 
The average overall albedo of Earth , its planetary albedo , is 30 to 35% because of cloud cover , but widely varies locally across the surface because of different geological and environmental features.

The term was introduced into optics by Johann Heinrich Lambert in his 1760 work Photometria.

Albedos of typical materials in visible light range from up to 0.9 for fresh snow to about 0.04 for charcoal , one of the darkest substances. 
Deeply shadowed cavities can achieve an effective albedo approaching the zero of a black body. 
When seen from a distance , the ocean surface has a low albedo , as do most forests , whereas desert areas have some of the highest albedos among landforms. 
Most land areas are in an albedo range of 0.1 to 0.4. 
The average albedo of the Earth is about 0.3. 
This is far higher than for the ocean primarily because of the contribution of clouds.

The Earth 's surface albedo is regularly estimated via Earth observation satellite sensors such as NASA 's MODIS instruments on board the Terra and Aqua satellites. 
As the total amount of reflected radiation cannot be directly measured by satellite , a mathematical model of the BRDF is used to translate a sample set of satellite reflectance measurements into estimates of directional-hemispherical reflectance and bi-hemispherical reflectance.

The Earth 's average surface temperature due to its albedo and the greenhouse effect is currently about 15 °C. 
If the Earth was frozen entirely ( and hence be more reflective ) the average temperature of the planet would drop below −40 °C If only the continental land masses became covered by glaciers , the mean temperature of the planet would drop to about 0 °C. 
In contrast , if all the ice on Earth were to melt — a so-called aquaplanet — the average temperature on the planet would rise to just under 27 °C.

The albedos of planets , satellites and asteroids can be used to infer much about their properties. 
The study of albedos , their dependence on wavelength , lighting angle ( " phase angle " ) , and variation in time comprises a major part of the astronomical field of photometry. 
For small and far objects that cannot be resolved by telescopes , much of what we know comes from the study of their albedos. 
For example , the absolute albedo can indicate the surface ice content of outer solar system objects , the variation of albedo with phase angle gives information about regolith properties , while unusually high radar albedo is indicative of high metallic content in asteroids.

Enceladus , a moon of Saturn , has one of the highest known albedos of any body in the Solar system , with 99% of EM radiation reflected. 
Another notable high-albedo body is Eris , with an albedo of 0.96. 
Many small objects in the outer solar system and asteroid belt have low albedos down to about 0.05. 
A typical comet nucleus has an albedo of 0.04. 
Such a dark surface is thought to be indicative of a primitive and heavily space weathered surface containing some organic compounds.

The overall albedo of the Moon is around 0.12 , but it is strongly directional and non-Lambertian , displaying also a strong opposition effect. 
While such reflectance properties are different from those of any terrestrial terrains , they are typical of the regolith surfaces of airless solar system bodies.

Two common albedos that are used in astronomy are the ( V-band ) geometric albedo ( measuring brightness when illumination comes from directly behind the observer ) and the Bond albedo ( measuring total proportion of electromagnetic energy reflected ). 
Their values can differ significantly , which is a common source of confusion.
