During the short reigns of his two eldest brothers , Æthelbald of Wessex and Æthelbert of Wessex , Alfred is not mentioned . 
However , his public life began with the accession of the third brother , Æthelred of Wessex , in 866 . 
It is during this period that Bishop Asser applies to him the unique title of " secundarius " , which may indicate a position akin to that of the Celtic tanist , a recognised successor closely associated with the reigning monarch . 
It is possible that this arrangement was sanctioned by Alfred 's father , or by the Witan , to guard against the danger of a disputed succession should Æthelred fall in battle . 
The arrangement of crowning a successor as royal prince and military commander is well known among other Germanic tribes , such as the Swedes and Franks , to whom the Anglo-Saxons were closely related . 
Alfred analysed the defects of the military system that he had inherited and implemented changes to remedy them . 
Alfred 's military reorganisation of Wessex consisted of three elements : the building of thirty fortified and garrisoned towns ( burhs ) along the rivers and Roman roads of Wessex ; the creation of a mobile ( horsed ) field force , consisting of his nobles and their warrior retainers , which was divided into two contingents , one of which was always in the field ; and the enhancement of Wessex 's seapower through the addition of larger ships to the existing royal fleet . 
Each element of the system was meant to remedy defects in the West Saxon military establishment exposed by the Viking invasions . 
If under the existing system he could not assemble forces quickly enough to intercept mobile Viking raiders , the obvious answer was to have a standing field force . 
If this entailed transforming the West Saxon fyrd from a sporadic levy of king 's men and their retinues into a mounted standing army , so be it . 
If his kingdom lacked strongpoints to impede the progress of an enemy army , he would build them . 
If the enemy struck from the sea , he would counter them with his own naval power . 
Characteristically , all of Alfred 's innovations were firmly rooted in traditional West Saxon practice , drawing as they did upon the three so-called ' common burdens ' of bridge work , fortress repair and service on the king 's campaigns that all holders of bookland and royal loanland owed the Crown . 
Where Alfred revealed his genius was in designing the field force and ' burhs ' ( boroughs ) , as these fortified sites were called , to be parts of a coherent military system . 
Neither Alfred 's reformed fyrd nor his burhs alone would have afforded a sufficient defence against the Vikings ; together , however , they robbed the Vikings of their major strategic advantages : surprise and mobility .
