Algeria 's first president was the FLN leader Ahmed Ben Bella . 
He was overthrown by his former ally and defence minister , Houari Boumédienne in 1965 . 
Under Ben Bella the government had already become increasingly socialist and authoritarian , and this trend continued throughout Boumédienne 's government . 
However , Boumédienne relied much more heavily on the army , and reduced the sole legal party to a merely symbolic role . 
Agriculture was collectivised , and a massive industrialisation drive launched . 
Oil extraction facilities were nationalised . 
This was especially beneficial to the leadership after the 1973 oil crisis . 
However , the Algerian economy became increasingly dependent on oil which led to hardship when the price collapsed during the 1980 s oil glut . 
In foreign policy , while Algeria shares much of its history and cultural heritage with neighbouring Morocco , the two countries have had somewhat hostile relations with each other ever since Algeria 's independence . 
Reasons for this include Morocco 's disputed claim to portions of western Algeria ( which led to the Sand War in 1963 ) , Algeria 's support for the Polisario Front for its right to self-determination , and Algeria 's hosting
of Sahrawi refugees within its borders in the city of Tindouf . 
Within Algeria , dissent was rarely tolerated , and the state 's control over the media and the outlawing of political parties other than the FLN was cemented in the repressive constitution of 1976 . 
Boumédienne died in 1978 , but the rule of his successor , Chadli Bendjedid , was little more open . 
The state took on a strongly bureaucratic character and corruption was widespread . 
The modernisation drive brought considerable demographic changes to Algeria . 
Village traditions underwent significant change as urbanisation increased . 
New industries emerged and agricultural employment was substantially reduced . 
Education was extended nationwide , raising the literacy rate from less than 10% to over 60% . 
There was a dramatic increase in the fertility rate to 7 – 8 children per mother . 
The issue of Amazigh languages and identity increased in significance , particularly after the extensive Kabyle protests of 2001 and the near - total boycott of local elections in Kabyle . 
The government responded with concessions including naming of Tamazight ( Berber ) as a national language and teaching it in schools . 
