From the belief in the survival of the dead arose the practice of offering food , lighting fires , etc. , at the grave , at first , maybe , as an act of friendship or filial piety , later as an act of ancestor worship .
The simple offering of food or shedding of blood at the grave develops into an elaborate system of sacrifice .
Even where ancestor worship is not found , the desire to provide the dead with comforts in the future life may lead to the sacrifice of wives , slaves , animals , and so on , to the breaking or burning of objects at the grave or to the provision of the ferryman 's toll : a coin put in the mouth of the corpse to pay the traveling expenses of the soul .
But all is not finished with the passage of the soul to the land of the dead .
The soul may return to avenge its death by helping to discover the murderer , or to wreak vengeance for itself .
There is a widespread belief that those who die a violent death become malignant spirits and endanger the lives of those who come near the haunted spot .
In Malay folklore , the woman who dies in childbirth becomes a pontianak , a vampire-like spirit who threatens the life of human beings .
People resort to magical or religious means of repelling spiritual dangers from such malignant spirits .
The practice of head shrinking among Jivaroan and Urarina peoples derives from an animistic belief that if the spirit of one 's mortal enemies , i.e. the nemesis of ones being , are not trapped within the head , they can escape slain bodies .
After the spirit transmigrates to another body , they can take the form of a predatory animal and even exact revenge .
However , many mythologies focus largely on corporeal beings rather than " spiritual " ones ; the latter may even be entirely absent .
Stories of transformation , deluge and doom myths , and myths of the origin of death do not necessarily have any animistic basis .
The term " animism " has been applied to many different philosophical systems .
It is used to describe Aristotle 's view of the relation of soul and body held also by the Stoics and Scholastics .
On the other hand monadology ( Leibniz ) has also been termed animistic .
The name is most commonly applied to vitalism , a view mainly associated with Georg Ernst Stahl and revived by F. Bouillier ( 1813 - 1899 ) , which makes life , or life and mind , the directive principle in evolution and growth , holding that all cannot be traced back to chemical and mechanical processes , but that there is a directive force which guides energy without altering its amount .
An entirely different class of ideas , also termed animistic , is the belief in the world soul ( anima mundi ) , held by Plato , Schelling and others .
There are some Hindu groups which may be considered animist .
The coastal Karnataka has a different tradition of praying the spirits for their good .
