 
A series of meetings , begun in 1969 , ended abruptly in 1972 when Britain announced it was sending an aircraft carrier and 8,000 troops to Belize to conduct amphibious exercises .
Guatemala then massed troops on the border .
Talks resumed between 1973 , but broke off in 1975 when tensions flared .
Guatemala began massing troops on the border , and Britain responded by deploying troops , along with an artillery battery , anti-aircraft missile units , six fighter jets , and a frigate , after which tensions were defused , largely as a result of many Guatemalan soldiers deserting and returning to their homes. At this point , the Belizean and British governments , frustrated at dealing with the military-dominated regimes in Guatemala , agreed on a new strategy that would take the case for self-determination to various international forums .
The Belize government felt that by gaining international support , it could strengthen its position , weaken Guatemala 's claims , and make it harder for Britain to make any concessions .
 
Belize argued that Guatemala frustrated the country 's legitimate aspirations to independence and that Guatemala was pushing an irrelevant claim and disguising its own colonial ambitions by trying to present the dispute as an effort to recover territory lost to a colonial power .
Between 1975 and 1981 , Belizean leaders stated their case for self-determination at a meeting of the heads of Commonwealth of Nations governments in Jamaica , the conference of ministers of the Nonaligned Movement in Peru , and at meetings of the United Nations ( UN ) .
The support of the Nonaligned Movement proved crucial and assured success at the UN. Latin American governments initially supported Guatemala .
Cuba , however , was the first Latin country , in December 1975 , to support Belize in a UN vote that affirmed Belize 's right to self-determination , independence , and territorial integrity .
The outgoing Mexican president , Luis Echeverría , indicated that Mexico would appeal to the Security Council to prevent Guatemala 's designs on Belize from threatening peace in the area .
In 1977 , Guatemala made further moves against Belize , but was deterred from invading , especially since British fighter jets had by then been permanently stationed there .
From 1977 onward , the border was constantly patrolled and observation posts to monitor key points. 1976 president Omar Torrijos of Panama began campaigning for Belize 's cause , and in 1979 the Sandinista government in Nicaragua declared unequivocal support for an independent Belize .
 
In each of the annual votes on this issue in the UN , the United States abstained , thereby giving the Guatemalan government some hope that it would retain United States backing .
Finally , in November 1980 , with Guatemala completely isolated , the UN passed a resolution that demanded the independence of Belize , with all its territory intact , before the next session of the UN in 1981 .
The UN called on Britain to continue defending the new nation of Belize .
It also called on all member countries to offer their assistance .
 
A last attempt was made to reach an agreement with Guatemala prior to the independence of Belize .
The Belizean representatives to the talks made no concessions , and a proposal , called the Heads of Agreement , was initialled on 11 March 1981 .
However , when far right political forces in Guatemala labelled the proposals as a sell-out , the Guatemalan government refused to ratify the agreement and withdrew from the negotiations .
Meanwhile , the opposition in Belize engaged in violent demonstrations against the Heads of Agreement .
The demonstrations resulted in four deaths , many injuries , and damage to the property of PUP leaders and their families .
A state of emergency was declared .
However , the opposition could offer no real alternatives .
With the prospect of independence celebrations in the offing , the opposition 's morale fell .
Independence came to Belize on 21 September 1981 , without reaching an agreement with Guatemala .
 
Britain continued to maintain a deterrent force in Belize ( British Forces Belize ) to protect it from Guatemala , consisting of an army battalion and No. 1417 Flight RAF of Harrier fighter jets .
The British also trained and strengthened the newly formed Belize Defence Force .
There was a serious fear of a Guatemalan invasion in April 1982 , when it was thought that Guatemala might take advantage of the Falklands War to invade , but these fears never materialised .
In 1994 , three years after Guatemala recognised Belizean independence , British Forces Belize was disbanded and most British troops left Belize , but the British maintained a training presence via the British Army Training and Support Unit Belize and 25 Flight Army Air Corps until 2011 , when the last British forces , except for seconded advisers , left Belize .
