The Caucasus is one of the most linguistically and culturally diverse regions on Earth .
The nation states that comprise the Caucasus today are the post-Soviet states Georgia , Armenia , and Azerbaijan .
The Russian divisions include Krasnodar Krai , Stavropol Krai , and the autonomous republics of Adygea , Karachay-Cherkessia , Kabardino-Balkaria , North Ossetia , Ingushetia , Chechnya , and Dagestan .
Three territories in the region claim independence but are not universally acknowledged as nation states by the international community : Abkhazia , Nagorno-Karabakh and South Ossetia .
The northern portion of the Caucasus is known as the Ciscaucasus and the southern portion as the Transcaucasus .
Ancient kingdoms of the region included Armenia , Albania , Colchis and Iberia , among others .
These kingdoms were later incorporated into various empires , including Media , Achaemenid Empire , Parthian Empire , and Sassanid Empire .
By this time , Zoroastrianism had become the dominant religion of the region ; however , the region would go through two other religious transformations .
Owing to the rivalry between Persia and Rome , and later Byzantium , the latter would invade the region several times , although it was never able to hold the region .
However , because Armenia and Georgia had become Christian entities , Christianity began to overtake Zoroastrianism .
With the Islamic conquest of Persia , the region came under the rule of the Arabs .
Armenia and the majority of Georgia maintained Christianity and georgian king David the Builder drove the Muslims out .
The region would later be conquered by the Seljuks , Ottomans , Mongols , local kingdoms and khanates , as well as , once again , Persia , until its conquest by Russia .
The region was unified as a single political entity twice – during the Russian Civil War ( Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic ) from 9 April 1918 to 26 May 1918 , and under the Soviet rule ( Transcaucasian SFSR ) from 12 March 1922 to 5 December 1936 .
In the 1940s , the Chechens and Ingush ( 480,000 altogether ) , along with the Balkars , Karachays , Meskhetian Turks ( 120,000 ) , Kurds and Caucasus Germans ( almost 200,000 ) were deported en masse to Central Asia and Siberia .
Following the end of the Soviet Union , Georgia , Azerbaijan and Armenia became independent in 1991 .
The most numerous peoples of the Caucasian-language family are Georgians ( 4,600,000 ) ; Chechens ( 800,000 ) ; and Avars ( 500,000 ) .
Georgians are the only Caucasian language-speaking people who have their own independent state – Georgia . 
Others of those peoples have republics within the Russian Federation : Adyghe ( Adygea ) , Cherkes ( Karachay-Cherkessia ) , Kabardins ( Kabardino-Balkaria ) , Ingush ( Ingushetia ) , Chechens ( Chechnya ) , while Northeast Caucasian peoples mostly live in Dagestan .
Abkhazians live in Abkhazia , which is de facto independent , but de jure is an autonomous republic within Georgia .
The Caucasus has many economically important minerals and energy resources , such as : alunite , gold , chromium , copper , iron ore , mercury , manganese , molybdenum , lead , tungsten , uranium , zinc , oil , natural gas , and coal ( both hard and brown ) .
