The United States of America 's intentions to influence the area ( especially the Panama Canal construction and control ) led to the separation of the Department of Panama in 1903 and the establishment of it as a nation .
The United States paid Colombia $25,000,000 in 1921 , seven years after completion of the canal , for redress of President Roosevelt 's role in the creation of Panama , and Colombia recognised Panama under the terms of the Thomson–Urrutia Treaty .
Colombia was engulfed in the Year-Long War with Peru over a territorial dispute involving the Amazonas department and its capital Leticia .
oon after , Colombia achieved some degree of political stability , which was interrupted by a bloody conflict that took place between the late 1940s and the early 1950s , a period known as La Violencia ( " The Violence " ) .
Its cause was mainly mounting tensions between the two leading political parties , which subsequently ignited after the assassination of the Liberal presidential candidate Jorge Eliécer Gaitán on 9 April 1948 .
The ensuing riots in Bogotá , known as El Bogotazo , spread throughout the country and claimed the lives of at least 180 ,000 Colombians .
Colombia entered the Korean War when Laureano Gómez was elected as President .
Colombia was the only Latin American country to join the war in a direct military role .
As an ally of the United States , Colombia’s mission was to help win the war effort and broker a lasting peace on the Asian peninsula .
Particularly important was the heroic resistance of the Colombian troops at Old Baldy .
From 1953 to 1964 the violence between the two political parties decreased first when Gustavo Rojas deposed the President of Colombia in a coup d'état and negotiated with the guerrillas , and then under the military junta of General Gabriel París Gordillo .
After Rojas' deposition , the Colombian Conservative Party and Colombian Liberal Party agreed to create the " National Front " , a coalition which would jointly govern the country .
Under the deal , the presidency would alternate between conservatives and liberals every 4 years for 16 years ; the two parties would have parity in all other elective offices .
The National Front ended " La Violencia " , and National Front administrations attempted to institute far-reaching social and economic reforms in cooperation with the Alliance for Progress .
In the end , the contradictions between each successive Liberal and Conservative administration made the results decidedly mixed .
Despite the progress in certain sectors , many social and political problems continued , and guerrilla groups were formally created such as the FARC , ELN , EPL , MAQL and M-19 to fight the government and political apparatus .
Since the 1960s , the country has suffered from an asymmetric low-intensity armed conflict between the government forces , left-wing guerrilla groups and right-wing paramilitaries .
The conflict escalated in the 1990s .
The conflict in Colombia takes place mainly in remote rural areas or marginalised sectors of very difficult access .
The United States of America has been heavily involved in the conflict since its beginnings , when in the early 1960s the U.S. government pushed the Colombian military to attack peasant self-defense communities in rural Colombia .
This was part of the U.S. fight against communism .
On 4 July 1991 , a new Constitution was promulgated .
The changes generated by the new constitution are viewed as positive by Colombian society .
During the presidency of Álvaro Uribe , the government applied more military pressure on the FARC and other outlawed groups .
After the offensive , many security indicators improved .
Since 2002 the violence decreased significantly , with some paramilitary groups demobilising as part of a controversial peace process and the guerrillas lost control of much of the territory they had once dominated .
Colombia achieved a great decrease in cocaine production , leading White House drug czar R. Gil Kerlikowske to announce that Colombia is no longer the world 's biggest producer of cocaine .
In February 2008 , millions of Colombians demonstrated against the FARC .
26,648 FARC and ELN combatants have decided to demobilise since 2002 .
During these years the military forces of the Republic of Colombia managed to be strengthened .
The Peace process in Colombia , 2012 refers to the dialogue between the Colombian government and guerrilla of FARC-EP with the aim to find a political solution to the armed conflict .
The Colombian government and rebel groups meet in Cuba .
As of November 2013 , the talks have represented breakthroughs .
The Government also began a process of assistance and reparation for victims of conflict .
Colombia shows modest progress in the struggle to defend human rights , as expressed by HRW .
In terms of international relations , Colombia has moved from a period of tense animosity with Venezuela , towards a prosperous outlook to further enhance integration .
Colombia has also won a seat on the Security Council of the UN .
Today Colombia is the third largest oil producer in South America and it is estimated that by 2012 , Colombia will be producing a million barrels a day .
In 2012 , the National Administrative Department of Statistics ( DANE ) reported that 32.7% of Colombians were living below the poverty line , of which 10.4% in " extreme poverty " .
More than 1.2 million Colombians have been lifted out of poverty .
In 2012 , the Colombian Government launched a policy to deliver 100,000 houses for poor people , the expansion of fiber optic and broadband coverage across the country and a subsidy for to reduce the digital divide .
Recent economic growth has led to a considerable increase of new millionaires , including the new entrepreneurs Colombians with net worth exceeding US$ 1 billion .
