Faust is the protagonist of a classic German legend ; a highly successful scholar but one dissatisfied with his life who makes a pact with the Devil , exchanging his soul for unlimited knowledge and worldly pleasures .
The Faust legend has been the basis for many literary , artistic , cinematic , and musical works that have reinterpreted it through the ages .
Faust and the adjective Faustian imply a situation in which an ambitious person surrenders moral integrity in order to achieve power and success for a delimited term .

The Faust of early books — as well as the ballads , dramas , movies and puppet-plays which grew out of them — is irrevocably damned because he prefers human to divine knowledge ; " he laid the Holy Scriptures behind the door and under the bench , refused to be called doctor of Theology , but preferred to be styled doctor of Medicine " .
Plays and comic puppet theatre loosely based on this legend were popular throughout Germany in the 16th century , often reducing Faust and Mephistopheles to figures of vulgar fun .
The story was popularised in England by Christopher Marlowe , who gave it a classic treatment in his play , The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus .
In Goethe 's reworking of the story two hundred years later , Faust becomes a dissatisfied intellectual that yearns for " more than earthly meat and drink " in his life .

The story may be summarised as follows :
Faust is bored and disappointed .
He decides to call on the Devil for further knowledge and magic powers with which to indulge all the pleasure and knowledge of the world .
In response , the Devil 's representative , Mephistopheles , appears .
He makes a bargain with Faust : Mephistopheles will serve Faust with his magic powers for a set number of years , but at the end of the term , the Devil will claim Faust 's soul and Faust will be eternally damned .
The term usually stipulated in the early tales is 24 years — one year for each of the hours in a day .

During the term of the bargain , Faust makes use of Mephistopheles in various ways .
In many versions of the story , particularly Goethe 's drama , Mephistopheles helps him to seduce a beautiful and innocent girl , usually named Gretchen , whose life is ultimately destroyed .
However , Gretchen 's innocence saves her in the end , and she enters Heaven .
In Goethe 's rendition , Faust is saved by God 's grace via his constant striving — in combination with Gretchen 's pleadings with God in the form of the Eternal Feminine .
However , in the early tales , Faust is irrevocably corrupted and believes his sins cannot be forgiven ; when the term ends , the Devil carries him off to Hell .

An important version of the legend is the play Faust , published in 1808 by the German author Johann Wolfgang von Goethe .

Goethe 's Faust complicates the simple Christian moral of the original legend .
A hybrid between a play and an extended poem , Goethe 's two-part " closet drama " is epic in scope .
It gathers together references from Christian , medieval , Roman , eastern and Hellenic poetry , philosophy and literature .

The composition and refinement of Goethe 's own version of the legend occupied him for over sixty years ( though not continuously ) .
The final version , published after his death , is recognised as a great work of German literature .

The story concerns the fate of Faust in his quest for the true essence of life ( " was die Welt im Innersten zusammenhält " ) .
Frustrated with learning and the limits to his knowledge , power , and enjoyment of life , he attracts the attention of the Devil ( represented by Mephistopheles ) , who agrees to serve Faust until the moment he attains the zenith of human happiness , such that he cries out to that moment to " stay , thou art so beautiful ! " ( Faust , I , l.1700 ) — at which point Mephistopheles may take his soul .
Faust is pleased with the deal , as he believes this happy zenith will never come .

In the first part , Mephistopheles leads Faust through experiences that culminate in a lustful relationship with Gretchen , an innocent young woman .
Gretchen and her family are destroyed by Mephistopheles ' deceptions and Faust 's desires .
Part one of the story ends in tragedy for Faust , as Gretchen is saved but Faust is left to grieve in shame .

The second part begins with the spirits of the earth forgiving Faust ( and the rest of mankind ) and progresses into allegorical poetry .
Faust and his Devil pass through and manipulate the world of politics and the world of the classical gods , and meet with Helen of Troy ( the personification of beauty ) .
Finally , having succeeded in taming the very forces of war and nature , Faust experiences a singular moment of happiness .

Mephistopheles tries to seize Faust 's soul when he dies after this moment of happiness , but is frustrated and enraged when angels intervene due to God 's grace .
Though this grace is truly ' gratuitous ' and does not condone Faust 's frequent errors perpetrated with Mephistopheles , the angels state that this grace can only occur because of Faust 's unending striving and due to the intercession of the forgiving Gretchen .
The final scene has Faust 's soul carried to heaven in the presence of God as the " Holy Virgin , Mother , Queen , Goddess ... The Eternal Feminine " .
The Goddess is thus victorious over Mephistopheles , who had insisted at Faust 's death that he would be consigned to " The Eternal Empty " .
