In June 1990 , ethnic tensions between Uzbeks and Kyrgyz surfaced in an area of the Osh Oblast where Uzbeks form a majority of the population .
Violent confrontations ensued , and a state of emergency and curfew were introduced .
Order was not restored until August 1990 .
On August 19 , 1991 , when the State Emergency Committee assumed power in Moscow , there was an attempt to depose Akayev in Kyrgyzstan .
After the coup collapsed the following week , Akayev and Vice President German Kuznetsov announced their resignations from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ( CPSU ) , and the entire politburo and secretariat resigned .
This was followed by the Supreme Soviet vote declaring independence from the USSR on August 31 , 1991 .
Kyrgyz was announced as the state language in September 1991 . 
In December 2001 , through a constitutional amendment , the Russian language was given official status .
The terrain of Kyrgyzstan is dominated by the Tian Shan and Pamir mountain systems , which together occupy about 65% of the national territory .
The Alay range portion of the Tian Shan system dominates the southwestern crescent of the country , and , to the east , the main Tian Shan range runs along the boundary between southern Kyrgyzstan and China before extending farther east into China 's Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region .
Kyrgyzstan 's average elevation is 2,750 metres , ranging from 7,439 metres at Peak Jengish Chokusu to 394 metres in the Fergana Valley near Osh .
Almost 90% of the country lies more than 1,500 metres above sea level .
In towns , wastewater collection provides about 70% of the water supply .
Although towns have biological treatment equipment , as much as 50% of such equipment is rated as ineffective .
The major sources of toxic waste in the water supply are the mercury mining combine at Haidarkan ; the antimony mine at Kadamzai ; the Kadzyi Sai uranium mine , which ceased extraction in 1967 but which continues to leach toxic materials into nearby Ysyk Köl ; the Kara-Balta Uranium Recovery Plant ; the Min Kush deposit of mine tailings ; and the Kyrgyz Mining and Metallurgy Plant at Orlovka .
The name Kyrgyz , both for the people and the country , means " forty girls " or " forty tribes " , a reference to the epic hero Manas who unified forty tribes against the Mongols , as symbolised by the 40-ray sun on the flag of Kyrgyzstan .
In the first years of Kyrgyzstan 's full independence , President Askar Akayev appeared wholeheartedly committed to the reform process .
However , despite the backing of major Western donors , including the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , Kyrgyzstan had consequential economic difficulties from the outset .
These came mainly as a result of the breakup of the Soviet trading bloc , which impeded the Republic 's smooth transfer to a free-market economy .
In 1993 , allegations of corruption against Akayev 's closest political associates blossomed into a major scandal .
One of those accused of improprieties was Vice President Feliks Kulov , who resigned for ethical reasons in December .
Following Kulov 's resignation , Akayev dismissed the government and called upon the last communist premier , Apas Djumagulov , to form a new one .
In January 1994 , Akayev initiated a referendum asking for a renewed mandate to complete his term of office .
He received 96.2% of the vote .
Kyrgyzstan 's principal exports , which go overwhelmingly to other CIS countries , are nonferrous metals and minerals , woolen goods and other agricultural products , electric energy , and certain engineering goods .
In turn , the republic relies on other former Soviet states for petroleum and natural gas , ferrous metals , chemicals , most machinery , wood and paper products , some foods , and most construction materials .
In 1999 , Kyrgyz exports to the US totalled $11.2 million , and imports from the US totalled $54.2 million .
Kyrgyzstan exports antimony , mercury , rare-earth metals , and other chemical products to the US , and it imports grain , medicine and medical equipment , vegetable oil , paper products , rice , machinery , agricultural equipment , and meat from the US .
The Kyrgyzstan Government has reduced expenditures , ended most price subsidies , and introduced a value added tax .
Overall , the government appears committed to transferring to a free market economic system by stabilising the economy and implementing reforms , which will encourage long-term growth .
These reforms led to Kyrgyzstan 's accession to the WTO on December 20 , 1998 .
With support from the Asian Development Bank , a major road linking the north and southwest from Bishkek to Osh has recently been completed . 
This considerably eases communication between the two major population centers of the country -- the Chui Valley in the north and the Fergana Valley in the South .
An offshoot of this road branches off across a 3,500 metre pass into the Talas Valley in the northwest .
Plans are now being formulated to build a major road from Osh into the People's Republic of China .
Frequent bus and , more commonly , minibus , service connects country 's major cities .
Minibuses provide public transit in cities and between cities to neighbouring villages .
