On 6 April 1941 , the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was invaded from all sides by the Axis powers , primarily by German forces but including Italian , Hungarian and Bulgarian formations as well .
During the invasion , Belgrade was bombed by the Luftwaffe .
The invasion lasted little more than ten days , ending with the unconditional surrender of the Royal Yugoslav Army on 17 April .
Besides being hopelessly ill-equipped when compared to the Wehrmacht , the Army attempted to defend all borders but only managed to thinly spread the limited resources available .
The terms of the capitulation were extremely severe , as the Axis proceeded to dismember Yugoslavia .
Germany occupied northern Slovenia , while retaining direct occupation over a rump Serbian state and considerable influence over its newly created puppet state , the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) , which extended over much of today 's Croatia and contained all of modern Bosnia and Herzegovina and Syrmia region of modern day Serbia .
Mussolini 's Italy occupied the remainder of Slovenia ( annexed and renamed Province of Ljubljana ) , Kosovo , and large chunks of the coastal Dalmatia region ( along with nearly all its Adriatic islands) .
It also gained control over the newly created Montenegrin puppet state , and was granted the kingship in the Independent State of Croatia , though wielding little real power within it .
Hungary dispatched the Hungarian Third Army to occupy part of Serbian Vojvodina , including Baranja and Bačka , and annexed the Croatian area of Međimurje and the Slovene area of Prekmurje .
Bulgaria , meanwhile , annexed nearly all of Macedonia , and small areas of eastern Serbia and Kosovo .
The dissolution of Yugoslavia , the creation of the NDH , Independent State of Montenegro and Nedic 's Serbia and the annexations of Yugoslav territory by the various Axis countries were incompatible with international law in force at that time .
The occupying forces instituted such severe burdens on the local populace that the Partisans came not only to enjoy widespread support but for many were the only option for survival .
Early in the occupation , German forces would hang or shoot indiscriminately , including women , children and the elderly , up to 100 local inhabitants for every one German soldier killed .
Furthermore , the country experienced a breakdown of law and order , with collaborationist militias roaming the countryside terrorising the population .
The government of the puppet Independent State of Croatia found itself unable to control its territory in the early stages of the occupation , resulting in a severe crackdown by the Ustaše militias and the German army .

Amid the relative chaos that ensued , the Communist Party of Yugoslavia moved to organise and unite anti-fascist factions and political forces into a nation-wide uprising .
The party , led by Josip Broz Tito , was banned after its significant success in the post-World War I Yugoslav elections and operated underground since .
