Some of the oldest civilisations appeared circa 6000 BC in the coastal provinces of Chilca and Paracas , and in the highland province of Callejón de Huaylas .
Over the following three thousand years , inhabitants switched from nomadic lifestyles to cultivating land , as evidence from sites such as Jiskairumoko , Kotosh , and Huaca Prieta demonstrates .
Cultivation of plants such as corn and cotton ( Gossypium Barbadense ) began , as well as the domestication of animals such as the wild ancestors of the llama , the alpaca , and the guinea pig .
Inhabitants practiced spinning and knitting of cotton and wool , basketry , and pottery .
These cultures developed relatively advanced techniques of cultivation , gold and silver craft , pottery , metallurgy , and knitting .
Around 700 BC , they appear to have developed systems of social organisation that were the precursors of the Inca civilisation .
The empire originated from a tribe based in Cuzco , which became the capital .
Pachacutec was the first ruler to considerably expand the boundaries of the Cuzco state . 
His offspring later ruled an empire by both violent and peaceful conquest .
The Empire 's administrative , political , and military center was located in Cuzco . 
The empire was divided into four quarters : Chinchasuyo , Antisuyo , Contisuyo , and Collasuyo .
The Tahuantinsuyo was organised in dominions with a stratified society , in which the ruler was the Inca .
It was also supported by an economy based on the collective property of the land .
In fact , the Inca Empire was conceived like an ambitious and audacious civilising project , based on a mythical thought , in which the harmony of the relationships between the human being , nature , and gods was truly essential .
The empire , being quite large , also had an impressive transportation system of roads to all points of the empire called the Inca Trail , and chasquis , message carriers who relayed information from anywhere in the empire to Cuzco .
When the Spanish landed in 1531 , Peru 's territory was the nucleus of the highly developed Inca civilisation .
Centered at Cuzco , the Inca Empire extended over a vast region , stretching from northern Ecuador to central Chile .
At that moment , the Inca Empire was preoccupied by a five-year civil war between two princes , Huáscar and Atahualpa .
Taking advantage of this , Pizarro carried out a coup d'état .
On November 16 , 1532 , while the natives were in a celebration in Cajamarca , the Spanish in a surprise move captured the Inca Atahualpa during the Battle of Cajamarca , causing a great consternation among the natives and conditioning the future course of the fight .
When Huascar was killed , the Spanish tried and convicted Atahualpa of the murder , executing him by strangulation .
Establishing a stable colonial government was delayed for some time by native revolts and bands of the Conquistadores ( led by Pizarro and Diego de Almagro ) fighting among themselves .
A long civil war developed , from which the Pizarros emerged victorious at the Battle of Las Salinas .
In 1541 , Pizarro was assassinated by a faction led by Diego de Almagro ( El Mozo ) , and the stability of the original colonial regime was shaken up in the ensuing civil war .
Despite this , the Spaniards did not neglect the colonising process .
Its most significant milestone was the foundation of Lima in January 1535 , from which the political and administrative institutions were organised .
The new rulers instituted an encomienda system , by which the Spanish extracted tribute from the local population , part of which was forwarded to Seville in return for converting the natives to Christianity . 
Title to the land itself remained with the king of Spain .
As governor of Peru , Pizarro used the encomienda system to grant virtually unlimited authority over groups of native Peruvians to his soldier companions , thus forming the colonial land - tenure structure .
The indigenous inhabitants of Peru were now expected to raise Old World cattle , poultry , and crops for their landlords .
Resistance was punished severely .
The necessity of consolidating Spanish royal authority over these territories , led to the creation of a Real Audiencia ( Royal Audience ) .
The following year , in 1542 , the Viceroyalty of Peru ( in Spanish , Virreinato del Perú ) was established , with authority over most of Spanish-ruled South America . 
Colombia , Ecuador , Panamá and Venezuela were split off as the Viceroyalty of New Granada ( in Spanish , Virreinato de Nueva Granada ) in 1717 ; and Argentina , Bolivia , Paraguay , and Uruguay were set up as the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata in 1776 .
The creation of the Viceroyalties of New Granada and Rio de la Plata ( at the expense of its territory ) , the duty exemptions that moved the commercial center from Lima to Caracas and Buenos Aires , and the decrease of the mining and textile production determined the progressive decay of the Viceroyalty of Peru .
The economic crisis favoured the indigenous rebellion from 1780 to 1781 .
This rebellion was headed by Túpac Amaru II .
At this time , the Napoleonic invasion of the Iberian Peninsula and the degradation of the Royal power took place .
The Creole rebellion of Huánuco arose in 1812 and the rebellion of Cuzco arose between 1814 and 1816 .
These rebellions defended the liberal principles sanctioned by the Constitution of Cadiz of 1812 .
These events created a favorable climate so that emancipating ideas developed between the Spanish Criollo people throughout the Spanish America .
In contrast , the Criollo oligarchy in Perú remained mostly loyal to Spain, which accounts for the fact that the Viceroyalty of Peru became the last redoubt of the Spanish dominion in South America .
After the world-wide crisis of 1929 , numerous brief governments followed one another .
The APRA party had the opportunity to cause system reforms by means of political actions , but it was not successful .
This was a nationalistic movement , populist and anti-imperialist , headed by Victor Raul Haya de la Torre in 1924 .
The Socialist Party of Peru , later the Peruvian Communist Party , was created four years later and it was led by Jose C. Mariategui .
President Bustamante y Rivero hoped to create a more democratic government by limiting the power of the military and the oligarchy .
Elected with the cooperation of the APRA , conflict soon arose between the President and Haya de la Torre .
Without the support of the APRA party , Bustamante y Rivero found his presidency severely limited .
The President disbanded his Aprista cabinet and replaced it with a mostly military one .
In 1948 , Minister Manuel A. Odría and other right-wing elements of the Cabinet urged Bustamante y Rivero to ban the APRA , but when the President refused , Odría resigned his post .
In a military coup on October 29 , Gen. Manuel A . Odría became the new president .
He came down hard on APRA , momentarily pleasing the oligarchy and all others on the right , but followed a populist course that won him great favour with the poor and lower classes . 
A thriving economy allowed him to indulge in expensive but crowd-pleasing social policies .
At the same time , however , civil rights were severely restricted and corruption was rampant throughout his régime .
Owing to such chronic inflation , the Peruvian currency , the sol , was replaced by the Inti in mid-1985 , which itself was replaced the nuevo sol ( " new sol " ) in July 1991 , at which time the new sol had a cumulative value of one billion old soles .
During his administration , the per capita annual income of Peruvians fell to $720 ( below the level of 1960 ) and Peru 's Gross Domestic Product dropped 20% .
By the end of his term , national reserves were a negative $900 million .
Fujimori 's administration was dogged by several insurgent groups , most notably Sendero Luminoso ( Shining Path ) , which carried on a terrorist campaign in the countryside throughout the 1980s and 1990s .
He cracked down on the insurgents and was successful in largely quelling them by the late 1990s , but the fight was marred by atrocities committed by the both Peruvian security forces and the insurgents : the Barrios Altos massacre and La Cantuta massacre by Government paramilitary groups , and the bombings of Tarata and Frecuencia Latina by Shining Path .
Those examples subsequently came to be seen as symbols of the human rights violations committed during the last years of violence .
With the capture of Abimael Guzmán ( known as President Gonzalo ) in September 1992 , the Shining Path received a severe blow which practically destroyed the organisation .
In December 1996 , a group of insurgents belonging to the MRTA took over the Japanese embassy in Lima , taking 72 people hostage .
Military commandos stormed the embassy compound in May 1997 , which resulted in the death of all 15 hostage takers , one hostage , and 2 commandos .
It later emerged , however , that Fujimori 's security chief Vladimiro Montesinos may have ordered the killing of at least eight of the rebels after they surrendered .
A caretaker government presided over by Valentín Paniagua took on the responsibility of conducting new presidential and congressional elections .
The elections were held in April 2001 ; observers considered them to be free and fair .
Alejandro Toledo ( who led the opposition against Fujimori ) defeated former President Alan García .
