After an agreement among the European colonial powers at the Berlin Conference in 1884 on the division of spheres of influence in Africa , Spain seized control of The Western Sahara and established it as a Spanish colony .
After 1939 and the outbreak of World War II , this area was administered by Spanish Morocco .
As a consequence , Ahmed Belbachir Haskouri , the Chief of Cabinet , General Secretary of the Government of Spanish Morocco , cooperated with the Spanish to select governors in that area .
The Saharan lords who were already in prominent positions , such as the members of Maa El Ainain family , provided a recommended list of candidates for new governors .
Together with the Spanish High Commissioner , Belbachir selected from this list .
During the annual celebration of Muhammad 's birthday , these lords paid their respects to the caliph to show loyalty to the Moroccan monarchy .

As time went by , Spanish colonial rule began to unravel with the general wave of decolonisation after World War II ; former North African and sub-Saharan African possessions and protectorates gained independence from European powers .
Spanish decolonisation proceeded more slowly , but internal political and social pressures for it in mainland Spain built up towards the end of Francisco Franco 's rule .
There was a global trend towards complete decolonisation .
Spain began rapidly to divest itself of most of its remaining colonial possessions .
By 1974–75 the government issued promises of a referendum on independence in the Western Sahara .

At the same time , Morocco and Mauritania , which had historical and competing claims of sovereignty over the territory , argued that it had been artificially separated from their territories by the European colonial powers .
Algeria , which also bordered the territory , viewed their demands with suspicion , as it also had a long-running rivalry with Morocco .
After arguing for a process of decolonisation to be guided by the United Nations , the Algerian government under Houari Boumédiènne in 1975 committed to assisting the Polisario Front , which opposed both Moroccan and Mauritanian claims and demanded full independence of the Western Sahara .

The UN attempted to settle these disputes through a visiting mission in late 1975 , as well as a verdict from the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) .
It acknowledged that Western Sahara had historical links with Morocco and Mauritania , but the population of this territory possessed the right of self-determination .
On 6 November 1975 Morocco initiated the Green March into Western Sahara ; 350,000 unarmed Moroccans converged on the city of Tarfaya in southern Morocco and waited for a signal from King Hassan II of Morocco to cross the border in a peaceful march .
A few days before , on 31 October , Moroccan troops invaded Western Sahara from the northwest .

In the waning days of General Franco 's rule , and after the Green March , the Spanish government signed a tripartite agreement with Morocco and Mauritania as it moved to transfer the territory on 14 November 1975 .
The accords were based on a bipartite administration , and Morocco and Mauritania each moved to annex the territories , with Morocco taking control of the northern two-thirds of Western Sahara as its Southern Provinces , and Mauritania taking control of the southern third as Tiris al-Gharbiyya .
Spain terminated its presence in Spanish Sahara within three months , repatriating Spanish remains from its cemeteries .

The Moroccan and Mauritanian annexations were resisted by the Polisario Front , which had gained backing from Algeria .
It initiated guerrilla warfare and , in 1979 , Mauritania withdrew due to pressure from Polisario , including a bombardment of its capital and other economic targets .
Morocco extended its control to the rest of the territory .
It gradually contained the guerrillas by setting up the extensive sand-berm in the desert ( known as the Border Wall or Moroccan Wall ) to exclude guerrilla fighters .
Hostilities ceased in a 1991 cease-fire , overseen by the peacekeeping mission MINURSO , under the terms of a UN Settlement Plan .

The referendum , originally scheduled for 1992 , foresaw giving the local population the option between independence or affirming integration with Morocco , but it quickly stalled .
In 1997 , the Houston Agreement attempted to revive the proposal for a referendum but likewise has hitherto not had success .
As of 2010 , negotiations over terms have not resulted in any substantive action .
At the heart of the dispute lies the question of who qualifies to be registered to participate in the referendum , and , since about the year 2000 , Morocco considers that since there is no agreement on persons entitled to vote , a referendum is not possible .
Meanwhile , Polisario still insisted on a referendum with independence as a clear option , without offering a solution to the problem of who is qualified to be registered to participate in it .

Both sides blame each other for the stalling of the referendum .
The Polisario has insisted on only allowing those found on the 1974 Spanish Census lists ( see below ) to vote , while Morocco has insisted that the census was flawed by evasion and sought the inclusion of members of Sahrawi tribes which escape from Spanish invasion to the north of Morocco by the 19th century .

Efforts by the UN special envoys to find a common ground for both parties did not succeed .
By 1999 the UN had identified about 85,000 voters , with nearly half of them in the Moroccan-controlled parts of Western Sahara or Southern Morocco , and the others scattered between the Tindouf refugee camps , Mauritania and other places of exile .
Polisario accepted this voter list , as it had done with the previous list presented by the UN ( both of them originally based on the Spanish census of 1974 ) , but Morocco refused and , as rejected voter candidates began a mass-appeals procedure , insisted that each application be scrutinised individually .
This again brought the process to a halt .

According to a NATO delegation , MINURSO election observers stated in 1999 , as the deadlock continued , that "if the number of voters does not rise significantly the odds were slightly on the RASD side" .
By 2001 , the process had effectively stalemated and the UN Secretary-General asked the parties for the first time to explore other , third-way solutions .
Indeed , shortly after the Houston Agreement ( 1997 ) , Morocco officially declared that it was "no longer necessary" to include an option of independence on the ballot , offering instead autonomy .
Erik Jensen , who played an administrative role in MINURSO , wrote that neither side would agree to a voter registration in which they were destined to lose .
