In the late 1960s , discrimination against the Catholic minority in electoral boundaries , voting rights , and the allocation of public housing led organisations such as Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association ( NICRA ) to mount a non-violent campaign for change .
While initially welcomed by the Catholics as a neutral force , relations between them and the Army soon deteriorated .
In response to escalating levels of violence across Northern Ireland , internment without trial was introduced on 9 August 1971 .
In a quid pro quo gesture to nationalists , all marches and parades were banned , including the flashpoint march by the Apprentice Boys of Derry which was due to take place on 12 August .
There was disorder across Northern Ireland following the introduction of internment , with 21 people being killed in three days of rioting .
On 10 August Bombardier Paul Challenor became the first soldier to be killed by the Provisional IRA in Derry , when he was shot by a sniper on the Creggan estate .
A further six soldiers had been killed in Derry by mid-December 1971 .
1,932 rounds were fired at the British Army , who also faced 211 explosions and 180 nail bombs and who fired 364 rounds in return .
Provisional IRA activity also increased across Northern Ireland with thirty British soldiers being killed in the remaining months of 1971 , in contrast to the ten soldiers killed during the pre-internment period of the year .
Both the Official IRA and Provisional IRA had established " no-go " areas for the British Army and RUC in Derry through the use of barricades .
By the end of 1971 , 29 barricades were in place to prevent access to what was known as Free Derry , 16 of them impassable even to the British Army's one-ton armoured vehicles .
IRA members openly mounted roadblocks in front of the media , and daily clashes took place between nationalist youths and the British Army at a spot known as " aggro corner " .
Due to rioting and damage to shops caused by incendiary devices , an estimated total of £4 million worth of damage had been done to local businesses .
In January 1972 NICRA intended , despite the ban , to organise a march in Derry to protest against internment .
The authorities who knew of the proposed march decided to allow it to proceed in the Catholic areas of the city , but to stop it from reaching Guildhall Square , as planned by the organisers .
Major General Robert Ford , then Commander of Land Forces in Northern Ireland , ordered that 1st Battalion , the Parachute Regiment ( 1 PARA ) should travel to Derry to be used to arrest possible rioters during the march .
1 PARA arrived in Derry on the morning of Sunday 30 January 1972 and took up positions in the city .
