Manual transmissions often feature a driver-operated clutch and a movable gear stick .
Most automobile manual transmissions allow the driver to select any forward gear ratio ( " gear " ) at any time , but some , such as those commonly mounted on motorcycles and some types of racing cars , only allow the driver to select the next-higher or next-lower gear .
This type of transmission is sometimes called a sequential manual transmission .

The way a manual transmission works is that the flywheel is attached to the engine , the clutch disk is in between the pressure plate and the flywheel .
When running , the clutch disk spins with the flywheel .
As the clutch pedal is depressed , the throw out bearing is pushed in , which makes the pressure plate stop applying pressure to the clutch disk .
This makes it stop receiving power from the engine so that the gear can be shifted without damaging the transmission .
When the clutch pedal is released , the clutch disk is allowed to start receiving power from the engine .

Manual transmissions are characterised by gear ratios that are selectable by locking selected gear pairs to the output shaft inside the transmission .
Conversely , most automatic transmissions feature epicyclic ( planetary ) gearing controlled by brake bands and / or clutch packs to select gear ratio .
Automatic transmissions that allow the driver to manually select the current gear are called Manumatics .
A manual-style transmission operated by computer is often called an automated transmission rather than an automatic .

Contemporary automobile manual transmissions typically use four to six forward gears and one reverse gear , although automobile manual transmissions have been built with as few as two and as many as eight gears .
Transmission for heavy trucks and other heavy equipment usually have at least 9 gears so the transmission can offer both a wide range of gears and close gear ratios to keep the engine running in the power band .
Some heavy vehicle transmissions have dozens of gears , but many are duplicates , introduced as an accident of combining gear sets , or introduced to simplify shifting .
Some manuals are referred to by the number of forward gears they offer ( e.g. , 5-speed ) as a way of distinguishing between automatic or other available manual transmissions .
Similarly , a 5-speed automatic transmission is referred to as a " 5-speed automatic. "

The earliest form of a manual transmission is thought to have been invented by Louis-René Panhard and Emile Levassor in the late 19th century .
This type of transmission offered multiple gear ratios and , in most cases , reverse .
The gears were typically engaged by sliding them on their shafts ( hence the phrase shifting gears ) , which required careful timing and throttle manipulation when shifting , so the gears would be spinning at roughly the same speed when engaged ; otherwise , the teeth would refuse to mesh .
These transmissions are called sliding mesh transmissions or sometimes crash boxes , because of the difficulty in changing gears and the loud grinding sound that often accompanied .
Newer manual transmissions on cars have all gears mesh at all times and are referred to as constant-mesh transmissions , with " synchro-mesh " being a further refinement of the constant mesh principle .

In both types , a particular gear combination can only be engaged when the two parts to engage ( either gears or clutches ) are at the same speed .
To shift to a higher gear , the transmission is put in neutral and the engine allowed to slow down until the transmission parts for the next gear are at a proper speed to engage .
The vehicle also slows while in neutral and that slows other transmission parts , so the time in neutral depends on the grade , wind , and other such factors .
To shift to a lower gear , the transmission is put in neutral and the throttle is used to speed up the engine and thus the relevant transmission parts , to match speeds for engaging the next lower gear .
For both upshifts and downshifts , the clutch is released ( engaged ) while in neutral .
Some drivers use the clutch only for starting from a stop , and shifts are done without the clutch .
Other drivers will depress ( disengage ) the clutch , shift to neutral , then engage the clutch momentarily to force transmission parts to match the engine speed , then depress the clutch again to shift to the next gear , a process called double clutching .
Double clutching is easier to get smooth , as speeds that are close but not quite matched need to speed up or slow down only transmission parts , whereas with the clutch engaged to the engine , mismatched speeds are fighting the rotational inertia and power of the engine .

Even though automobile and light truck transmissions are now almost universally synchronised , transmissions for heavy trucks and machinery , motorcycles , and for dedicated racing are usually not .
Non-synchronised transmission designs are used for several reasons .
The friction material , such as brass , in synchronisers is more prone to wear and breakage than gears , which are forged steel , and the simplicity of the mechanism improves reliability and reduces cost .
In addition , the process of shifting a synchromesh transmission is slower than that of shifting a non-synchromesh transmission .
For racing of production-based transmissions , sometimes half the teeth on the dog clutches are removed to speed the shifting process , at the expense of greater wear .

Heavy duty trucks often use unsynchronised transmissions , though military trucks usually have synchronised transmissions , allowing untrained personnel to operate them in emergencies .
In the United States , traffic safety rules refer to non-synchronous transmissions in classes of larger commercial motor vehicles .
In Europe , heavy duty trucks use synchronised gearboxes as standard .

Similarly , most modern motorcycles use unsynchronised transmissions : their low gear inertias and higher strengths mean that forcing the gears to alter speed is not damaging , and the pedal operated selector on modern motorcycles , with no neutral position between gears ( except , commonly , 1st and 2nd ) , is not conducive to having the long shift time of a synchronised gearbox .

Most modern manual-transmission vehicles are fitted with a synchronised gear box .
Transmission gears are always in mesh and rotating , but gears on one shaft can freely rotate or be locked to the shaft .
The locking mechanism for a gear consists of a collar ( or dog collar ) on the shaft which is able to slide sideways so that teeth ( or dogs ) on its inner surface bridge two circular rings with teeth on their outer circumference : one attached to the gear , one to the shaft .
When the rings are bridged by the collar , that particular gear is rotationally locked to the shaft and determines the output speed of the transmission .
The gearshift lever manipulates the collars using a set of linkages , so arranged so that one collar may be permitted to lock only one gear at any one time ; when " shifting gears " , the locking collar from one gear is disengaged before that of another is engaged .
One collar often serves for two gears ; sliding in one direction selects one transmission speed , in the other direction selects another .

In a synchromesh gearbox , to correctly match the speed of the gear to that of the shaft as the gear is engaged the collar initially applies a force to a cone-shaped brass clutch attached to the gear , which brings the speeds to match prior to the collar locking into place .
The collar is prevented from bridging the locking rings when the speeds are mismatched by synchro rings ( also called blocker rings or baulk rings ) . 
The synchro ring rotates slightly due to the frictional torque from the cone clutch .
In this position , the dog clutch is prevented from engaging .
The brass clutch ring gradually causes parts to spin at the same speed .
When they do spin the same speed , there is no more torque from the cone clutch and the dog clutch is allowed to fall into engagement .
In a modern gearbox , the action of all of these components is so smooth and fast it is hardly noticed .

The modern cone system was developed by Porsche and introduced in the 1952 Porsche 356 ; cone synchronisers were called Porsche-type for many years after this .
In the early 1950s , only the second-third shift was synchromesh in most cars , requiring only a single synchro and a simple linkage ; drivers ' manuals in cars suggested that if the driver needed to shift from second to first , it was best to come to a complete stop then shift into first and start up again .
With continuing sophistication of mechanical development , fully synchromesh transmissions with three speeds , then four , and then five , became universal by the 1980s .
Many modern manual transmission cars , especially sports cars , now offer six speeds .
The 2012 Porsche 911 offers a seven-speed manual transmission , with the seventh gear intended for cruising - top speed being attained on sixth .

Reverse gear is usually not synchromesh , as there is only one reverse gear in the normal automotive transmission and changing gears into reverse while moving is not required - and often highly undesirable , particularly at high forward speed .
Additionally , the usual method of providing reverse , with an idler gear sliding into place to bridge what would otherwise be two mismatched forward gears , is necessarily similar to the operation of a crash box .
