In 1941 , the Viet Minh – a communist and nationalist liberation movement – emerged under the Marxist-Leninist revolutionary Ho Chi Minh , who sought independence for Vietnam from France and the end of the Japanese occupation. 
Following the military defeat of Japan and the fall of its puppet Empire of Vietnam in August 1945 , the Viet Minh occupied Hanoi and proclaimed a provisional government , which asserted national independence on 2 September. 
In the same year , the Provisional French Republic sent the French Far East Expeditionary Corps to restore colonial rule , and the Viet Minh began a guerrilla campaign against the French in late 1946. 
The resulting First Indochina War lasted until July 1954 .

The defeat of French and Vietnamese loyalists in the 1954 Battle of Dien Bien Phu allowed Ho Chi Minh to negotiate a ceasefire from a favorable position at the subsequent Geneva Conference. 
The colonial administration was ended and French Indochina was dissolved under the Geneva Accords of 1954 , which separated the loyalist forces from the communists at the 17th parallel north with the Vietnamese Demilitarised Zone. 
Two states formed after the partition – Ho Chi Minh's Democratic Republic of Vietnam in the north and Emperor Bảo Đại's State of Vietnam in the south. 
A 300-day period of free movement was permitted , during which almost a million northerners , mainly Catholics , moved south , fearing persecution by the communists .

The partition of Vietnam was not intended to be permanent by the Geneva Accords , which stipulated that Vietnam would be reunited after elections in 1956. 
However , in 1955 , the State of Vietnam's Prime Minister , Ngo Dinh Diem , toppled Bảo Đại in a fraudulent referendum organised by his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu , and proclaimed himself president of the Republic of Vietnam .

The pro-Hanoi Viet Cong began a guerrilla campaign in the late 1950s to overthrow Diem's government. 
In the North , the communist government launched a land reform program , and executed between 50,000 and 172,000 people in campaigns against wealthy farmers and landowners , amid broader purges. 
In 1960 and 1962 , the Soviet Union and North Vietnam signed treaties providing for further Soviet military support. 
In the South , Diem went about crushing political and religious opposition , imprisoning or executing tens of thousands .

In 1963 , Buddhist discontent with Diem's regime erupted into mass demonstrations , leading to a violent government crackdown. 
This led to the collapse of Diem's relationship with the United States , and ultimately to the 1963 coup in which Diệm and Nhu were assassinated. 
The Diem era was followed by more than a dozen successive military governments , before the pairing of Air Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky and General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu took control in mid-1965. 
Thieu gradually outmaneuvered Ky and cemented his grip on power in fraudulent elections in 1967 and 1971. 
Under this political instability , the communists began to gain ground .

To support South Vietnam's struggle against the communist insurgency , the United States began increasing its contribution of military advisers , using the 1964 Tonkin Gulf incident as a pretext for such intervention. 
US forces became involved in ground combat operations in 1965 , and at their peak they numbered more than 500,000. 
The US also engaged in a sustained aerial bombing campaign. 
Meanwhile , China and the Soviet Union provided North Vietnam with significant material aid and 15,000 combat advisers. 
Communist forces supplying the Vietcong carried supplies along the Ho Chi Minh trail , which passed through Laos .

The communists attacked South Vietnamese targets during the 1968 Tet Offensive. 
Although the campaign failed militarily , it shocked the American establishment , and turned US public opinion against the war. 
Facing an increasing casualty count , rising domestic opposition to the war , and growing international condemnation , the US began withdrawing from ground combat roles in the early 1970s. 
This process also entailed an unsuccessful effort to strengthen and stabilise South Vietnam .

Following the Paris Peace Accords of 27 January 1973 , all American combat troops were withdrawn by 29 March 1973. 
In December 1974 , North Vietnam captured the province of Phước Long and started a full-scale offensive , culminating in the Fall of Saigon on 30 April 1975. 
South Vietnam was briefly ruled by a provisional government while under military occupation by North Vietnam. 
On 2 July 1976 , North and South Vietnam were merged to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. 
The war left Vietnam devastated , with the total death toll standing at between 800,000 and 3.1 million .
